Introduction to
Economics

INTRODUCTION
TO
P'

1

P

r
\

P"

Q'

Q

Q'

NEW YORK
TORONTO
LONDON

ECONOMICS
By Jokn V. Van Sickle
Professor of Economics, Wabash College
&

Benjamin A.

Ro^e

Associate Professor of Economics, Wabash College

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY, INC.

NEW YORK

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY, INC.
250 Fourth Avenue, New York 3
TORONTO

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY (Canada), Ltd.
25 Hollinger Road, Toronto
LONDON

MACMILLAN & COMPANY, Ltd.
St. Martin's Street, London, W.C. 2
Copyright 1954, by D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.
Published simultaneously in Canada by
D. Van Nostrand Company (Canada), Ltd.

Designed by Lewis F. White
All rights in this book are reserved. Without written authorization from D. Van
Nostrand Company, Inc., 250 Fourth Ave., New York S, N. Y., it may not be
reproduced in any form in whole or in part (except for quotations in critical
articles or reviews), nor may it be used for dramatic, motion-talking-picture, radio,
television, or any other similar purpose.
Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 54-7538
Printed in the United States of America

Prefi
retace

XHIS is an elementary introduction
to a vast field. We have deliberately refrained from bringing in
many of the refinements of theory and for two reasons. First of all,
these refinements seem more appropriate to a text for an intermediate course in economics. In the second place, the basic principles
as developed in this book seem to provide an adequate foundation
on which men of good judgment can build conclusions and recommendations.
After a brief statement of the issues with which economics is concerned, the book starts with a description of certain features common to all economic systems that are based on specialization and
the use of money. The national income accounts are introduced
briefly at this point and some of their uses and limitations as measures of over-all performance are explained. This is followed by a
survey of the operating principles of a predominantly private enterprise economy and of the way in which men as producers organize
their specialized activities with a view to satisfying their needs as
consumers. The purpose of this introductory section is to provide
the student with guide posts so that he will not get lost as we
examine in detail various aspects of a private enterprise economy.
Part Two (Chapters 6 through 15) describes the operations of a
market economy under the extreme assumptions of pure competition, a neutral money, and the complete absence of technological
change, population growth, and trading relations with other economic systems. The purpose is to show how the forces of supply
and demand would, under these circumstances, bring the economy
into a position of long-run equilibrium and at one and the same time

VI

PREFACE

determine the allocation of resources and the distribution of the
social output among resource owners.
In Parts Three and Four (Chapters 16 through 26) these restricting assumptions are removed one by one. First, the effects of
various departures from pure competition are examined. Next, the
existence of growth and of economic regions and independent nations is recognized, and it is shown how difficult it would be for the
price mechanism to bring about a world-wide general equilibrium
even if national governments refrained from interfering with the
forces which lead to territorial specialization and trade. In this connection the role of the State in a market economy is examined. Then
the assumption of a neutral money is dropped. The operation of a
fractional reserve banking system is explained by means of a series
of models, and the possibilities of controlling the price level are
examined (1) on the assumption of complete isolation and (2) in the
real world of independent states with different monetary systems
and different goals and aspirations. This discussion ends with an
evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the international gold
standard as a device for promoting international specialization and
multilateral trade. The theory of international trade is introduced
in connection with this discussion.
The next six Parts (Chapters 27 through 42) deal with what seem
to the authors to be the major economic problems confronting the
American people today: the control of business fluctuations; the
relations of government to business, organized labor, and agriculture; the possibility of introducing social security measures into a
predominantly private enterprise system without unduly weakening
its adaptability, its productivity, and its capacity to grow; the relationship of all these problems with those which arise from the
economic interdependence of nations; and finally the problem of
devising a fiscal system compatible with the operating requirements
of a private enterprise system and with the realities of political
democracy.
Up to this point in the analysis we take no position regarding the
ethical validity of the competitive private enterprise system or its
superiority (or inferiority) to possible alternative forms of social
organization. We simply accept the fact that the American economy is still predominantly based on private property and private
initiatives and that our elected representatives believe that their
constituents regard these arrangements as desirable from an ethical
as well as a narrowly economic point of view. These assumptions
appear to be justified by the insertion into the preambles of most

PREFACE

Vii

federal laws of statements such as that in Section 2 of the Employment Act of 1946 that the law is designed "to promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare." In Part Eleven on
"Alternatives to Capitalism," we first query these assumptions. With
a view to testing them we examine the possibility of substituting for
private capitalism the systems of communism, socialism, and comprehensive planning. Of these alternatives, as of private competitive
capitalism, we ask this basic question: Can they protect our individual liberties and our political freedoms and at the same time keep
the road open for spiritual and material progress? Our own answer
to this question, in so far as it has not already slipped out by inadvertency, is set forth in the Epilogue.
The treatment of the national income accounts in the text proper
is brief. That is inevitable in a general introduction to economics.
For those who wish to acquaint themselves with the way in which
the national income figures are derived, we have placed in Appendix
A a technical exposition of the national income accounts prepared
by our colleague Professor Fergus R. Ormes. It could very well be
studied immediately after Chapter 2. We ourselves have found it
more satisfactory to use the materials in this Appendix after the
study of money and banking and just before the section on business
fluctuations.
The questions at the end of each chapter are of two types—review
questions and problem questions. The review questions are intended
to indicate to the student the concepts, the facts, and the relationships which he should master before going on. The problem questions are the kind we like to use with a view to showing that theory
can illuminate contemporary problems.
The text has benefited from a trial run with our beginning students. We have found it teachable. With work book problems and
collateral readings such as are readily available, it is entirely adequate for a full-year course. Chapter by chapter cross-references
to six books of Selected Readings and to two Work Books are to be
found in Appendix B.
We take this occasion to express our appreciation to the authors
and the publishers who have without exception consented to let us
use their materials. In particular we are grateful to the Vanderbilt
University Press for its willingness to allow us to make free use,
sometimes without quotations marks or precise page citations, of
ideas developed in Planning for the South: An Inquiry into the Economics of Regionalism by J. V. Van Sickle, the senior author of this
book. In the same way, we are grateful to Field Enterprises, Inc.,

Vlll

PREFACE

publishers of World Book Encyclopedia, for permission to use various materials from articles on economic topics written by Benjamin
A. Rogge, the junior author of this book. It is not always easy for
a writer to avoid plagiarizing himself.
Finally we wish to express our gratitude to our colleague Warren
Shearer for his critical reading of the manuscript. He has saved us
from many errors of fact and theory. There are others too numerous
to mention, including students, whose influence is reflected in these
pages.
February 1954

JOHN V. VAN SICKLE
BENJAMIN A. ROGGE

Contents
PREFACE

V

I. THE MARKET ECONOMY: DESCRIPTION
AND ANALYSIS

Part One: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
1. THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS

3

What is economics? . . . Why study economics?
2. FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

11

The national income accounts. . . . The components of
total spending. . . . Some important relationships. . . .
The limitations of national income accounts
3. THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM: A PREVIEW

23

What is the private enterprise system? . . . How does
the system work? . . . The problems of free enterprise
4. SPECIALIZATION

35

The division of labor. . . . Conditions favoring specialization. . . . The advantages of specialization. . . . Some
social consequences of specialization
5. FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

49

The legal concept of the firm. . . . The social significance of the corporation

Part Two: THE MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE
COMPETITION
6. MARKETS AND COMPETITION

Noncompetitive markets. . . . On the meaning of
market
ix

65

CONTENTS
7. DEMAND: THE LAWS OF CONSUMPTION

73

The meaning of demand. . . . The determinants of
demand. . . . Changes of demand. . . . The law of
demand. . . . The consumer's spending pattern
8. DEMAND ELASTICITIES

84

The meaning of elasticity. . . . Degrees of elasticity. . . .
The significance of elasticity. . . . Measures of elasticity. . . . The determinants of elasticity. . . . Time and
elasticity. . . . Demand facing the firm under competition
9. SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION

94

Factors behind supply. . . . Factors behind cost. . . .
Production: Crusoe model. . . . The law of diminishing returns
10. SUPPLY: COSTS OF PRODUCTION

105

Supply of resources to the firm. . . . Short-run costs. . . .
Long-run costs
11. DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION:
CONCEPTS OF EQUILIBRIUM

115

Profits and losses. . . . Adjustment and time. . . . The
adjustment process in the immediate-run. . . . The adjustment process in the short-run. . . . The adjustment
process in the long-run. . . . Increasing-, constant-, and
decreasing-cost industries. . . . General equilibrium.
. . . The pattern of the analysis to follow
12. DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

130

Meaning of the term "distribution.". . . Personal income inequalities. . . . The marginal productivity principle of distribution. . . . Profits. . . . Rent. . . . The
measurement of rent. . . . Rents as marginal products.
. . . The conversion of rents into land values
13. DISTRIBUTION: THE FUNCTIONS OF RENT

150

The problem of vested rights
14. DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

Attaining balance in a stationary economy. . . . The
functions of interest

161

CONTENTS
15. DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

Xi
175

Determination of wage rates. . . . Wage differentials.
. . . Geographical wage differentials. . . . Summary

Part Three: THE MARKET ECONOMY UNDER LESSTHAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS
16. THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

189

Monopoly. . . . Duopoly and oligopoly with standardized products. .. . Duopoly and oligopoly with product
differentiation. . . . Monopolistic competition. . . . Monopsony, duopsony, and oligopsony
17. COLLUSION

204

Business collusion.. . . Collusion among other resource
owners
18. EFFECTIVE COMPETITION

216

The impossibility of pure competition. . . . How competitive is the American market?
19. GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM: REGIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL

225

Regional inequalities. . . . National inequalities. . . .
Capitalism and the widening international gap. . . .
Growing international tensions
20. THE STATE IN A MARKET ECONOMY

239

The state and the private firm. . . . The functions of
the state

Part Four: BANKING AND THE MONETARY CIRCUIT
21. MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

251

Specialization requires money.... The value of money.
. . . Inflation and deflation
22. BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

266

Investment banking. . . . Commercial banking
23. MONETARY MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

Four banking models

281

Xll

CONTENTS
24. CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY OF THE
UNITED STATES

302

The currency system... . Commercial banking. . . . The
first and second banks of the United States. . . . "Wildcat" banking. . . . The national banking act. . . . The
federal reserve system. . . . Summary
25. INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

325

The theory of international trade. . . . The international
gold standard.... The balance of payments of a nation.
.. . The financing of foreign transactions. . . . The rules
of the international gold standard. . .. Interdependence
of national price levels
26. REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

345

Currency management by a single country.. . . Universal currency management. . . . The consequence of inadequate devaluation. . . . Is the United States on the
gold standard?

II. THE MARKET ECONOMY: PROBLEMS
AND POLICIES

Part Five: BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS
27. FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

389

Business cycle. . . . Business cycle explanations
28. THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

387

What is meant by "Keynesian economics"? . . . Keynesian analysis: the assumptions. . . . the cycle. . . . the
national income accounts. . . . Keynesian policy
29. ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

405

The gold standard and the business cycle. .. . Managed
currency and the business cycle. . . . The structural disequilibrium theory. . . . A comparison of Orthodox and
Keynesian positions

Part Six: BUSINESS AND LABOR
30. GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

Government as a promoter of competition. . . . Government as a promoter of monopoly. . . . Conclusion

419

CONTENTS
31. WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

Xiii
434

The structure of wages in an economy in long-run
equilibrium. . . . in an economy approaching long-run
general equilibrium
32. NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

447

Regionalism: a tool of economic analysis. . . . Why is
the South poor? . . . What is the solution? . . . Free
enterprise favors a balanced solution. . . . Regional
reactions. . . . Federal government's own wage policy.
. . . The Walsh-Healey act. . . . The fair labor standards act
33. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

463

Definitions. . . . Wage determination under monopsony
and oligopsony

Part Seven: AGRICULTURE
34. AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

477

Farm versus nonfarm incomes: 1929. . . . Forces tending to depress farm incomes. . . . Farming and the business cycle. . . . Special complications
35. GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

489

Improved credit facilities. . . . Output restrictions. . . .
Price supports. . . . Conservation. . . . Tenancy reform
and farm ownership. . . . Revising our federal farm
program

Part Eight: SOCIAL SECURITY
36. SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

509

The security concept analyzed. . . . Responsibility for
security. . . . The social insurances. . . . The welfare
principle. . . . Social security and federalism
37. THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

The Social Security Act of 1935. . . . Unemployment
insurance. . . . Old-age and Survivors Insurance. . . .
Public assistance to the needy. . . . Children's services

526

CONTENTS

Part Nine: AMERICAN FOREIGN
RELATIONS

ECONOMIC

38. THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

543

American foreign economic policy: prior to 1920. . . .
1920-1932
1932 to World War II
The heritage
of World War II. . . . Summary
39. CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

558

The International Monetary Fund. . . . The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
40. CONTEMPORARY ISSUES (CONT'D)

576

The International Labour Organization. . . . The International Trade Organization. . . . The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. . . . Is the American market
still protected? . . . Foreign aid. . . . Conclusion

Part Ten: FISCAL POLICY
41. FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

597

Orthodox fiscal policy. • . . Orthodox compensatory
fiscal policy. . . . Traditional humanitarian-welfare fiscal policy. . . . Humanitarian full-employment. . . . Fiscal policy and federalism
42. AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

613

The period of fiscal orthodoxy. . . . Fiscal policy 1910
to date. . . . The federal personal income tax. . . . The
corporation income tax. . . . Taxes on bequests. . . .
Some consequences of highly progressive taxation

Part Eleven: ALTERNATIVES

TO CAPITALISM

43. COMMUNISM

643

An over-all comparison. . • . The communist model
44. SOCIALISM

The Mises indictment. . . . The planning board and the
planning budget. . . . Innovation. . . . "Liberal socialism" and the business cycle . . . and peace

654

CONTENTS
45.

PLANNING

XV
671

Domestic measures for full employment. . . . International measures
EPILOGUE

685

APPENDIX A — T H E NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

691

APPENDIX B—REFERENCES

727

INDEX

731

/. The Market Economy
DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

PART ONE

Fundamental Concepts

The Nature
ana Scope of Economics

W I T H this sentence many of you
begin your first study of Economics. You are about to spend
time, effort, and money to gain an understanding of this subject.
Do you know what you are buying? If you do, you are unusual.
Just what is economics? What can you do with an understanding
of economics that you cannot do without it? Why should anyone
study economics? This chapter is designed to give you a first, brief
answer to each of these questions.

WHAT IS ECONOMICS?
A preliminary definition. Economics is a study of the ways in
which people use resources to satisfy their wants. The word wants
requires little explanation. All of us want the food, clothing, and
shelter that we need to stay alive. But most of us (even college
teachers!) want much more. We want cars, television sets, vacation
trips—in fact, our capacity to want is almost unlimited.
In contrast, the things we want are always limited in quantity.
Even in a wealthy country like the United States there is never
enough of everything to satisfy all the wants of every person in
the country. How to narrow this gap between what people want
and what they are able to get is the basic problem studied in economics. We shall refer to this problem as the problem of scarcity.
Narrowing the gap. There are two ways to narrow the gap. One
is to want less; the other is to get more. Poets, philosophers, the
proponents of various religions, and employers often counsel us to
follow the first way. History shows that we have usually attempted
the second way, the way of getting more, with varying and not3

4

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

easily-measured degrees of success. The economist cannot say
which way is the better. His studies, however, are limited to the
second way, to the method of getting more rather than to the
method of wanting less.
Getting more of what? The economist limits his studies to the
attempts of people to get more of the things they want. But even
in this limited area there are things which are outside his field of
study. For reasons that will be made clear as we proceed, the
economist confines his attention to those things which are exchanged. Useful, scarce goods which can be exchanged are called
economic goods. All other goods are called noneconomic goods.
Many of the things which satisfy human wants cannot be exchanged—the physical potential to play football, the liking of one's
friends, the love of family members, etc. It may well be that these
sources of satisfaction are more important than the ones which can
be exchanged, the ones which the economist studies. However,
most people seem to prefer some combination of economic goods
and noneconomic goods.
We now have limited the economist to a study of how people
go about getting more economic goods—more food, clothing, and
shelter, new cars, television sets, etc. Does this mean that each of
you can learn how to get more of these things by studying economics? Unfortunately, the answer to this question is, "no."
People who do not understand this often ask us, "You're economists; why aren't you rich?" We regret even more than you do
that we cannot tell you how to get rich. What do we mean, then,
when we say that economics is a study of the method of getting
more? We mean that economics is a study of how groups of people
organize the use of resources to accomplish this goal. Let us take a
closer look at what this means.
Using resources: production. There are two broad classes of resources: human and natural. As human beings we apply our physical strength and intelligence to the resources provided by nature
and, barring a mistake in judgment, the result is something which
satisfies human wants—a loaf of bread, a symphony concert, or an
airplane. This act of creating something which satisfies human
wants is called production. As we shall see, production in a modern
economy is not one act but a long series of acts, performed by many
different people, at many different places, and at many different
periods of time. Each step, including the final sale of the product
or service to the consumer, is part of the process of production.
If resources were so ample or wants so few that we could produce

THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS

5

all of everything that anyone might want, there would be no economic problem (and no economics). But this happy situation can
never prevail. Resources are always scarce relative to the wants
for the goods and services produced by using resources. Hence,
in every society, certain choices or decisions have to be made.
The critical decisions. The critical decisions which must be made
are: (1) What things are to be produced, and in what amounts? (2)
To what task is each person and each unit of natural resources to
be assigned? (3) When the goods have been produced, how much
is each person to receive as his share? The arrangements used to
make (and enforce) these decisions in any society constitute the
economic organization, or economic system, of that society.
Types of economic organization. Each society in the history of
man has had a distinctive type of economic organization. Indeed,
the economic system of a given society usually changes over time.
In spite of this fact, it is possible to classify actual systems as belonging to one of two idealized types. The first type is one in
which some central agency, usually the central government, decides what is to be produced, who is to do each of the tasks in
production, and how the output is to be divided. The second type
is one in which these decisions are left to individuals who act in
response to the indications of what is known as "the price system/'
In actual life, no economic system conforms completely with either
of these idealized systems or models. There is always some blending of central direction and individual decision-making.
In our own times, Germany under Hitler, Italy under Mussolini,
Russia under the Communists, and Great Britain under the British
Labor Party are examples of economic systems patterned largely
after the first type—although there exist significant differences in
degree of centralized control and in the amount of personal and
political freedom permitted in these countries. The economic systems of the United States and Canada follow the general pattern
of the second type of economic organization, although some elements of centralized control are found in each country's economic
system.
We shall direct most of our attention in this book to the second
type of system. We do this for two reasons: First, the American
economy is still predominantly a price-directed economy. Second,
a thorough understanding of how this kind of system works is essential to an understanding of the possibilities and the shortcomings
of systems based on central direction. The price-directed type of
economic system which we shall study in considerable detail is

6

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

called by various names: "The Price System"; "The Free Market
System"; "The Voluntary System"; "Free Enterprise"; "Free Private
Enterprise"; "The Enterprise System"; or "Capitalism." We shall
use these designations more or less interchangeably throughout the
book.
We shall study the economic systems of the centrally directed
type in Chapters 43-45, although we shall make brief references
to these systems throughout the book.
Another definition of economics. It is now possible to develop
a more revealing definition of economics than the one first given.
We may now define economics as a study of how people organize
the use of resources to satisfy their wants. In other words, economics is a study of economic organization. It is a study of how each
type of economic organization is supposed to work. It is also a
study of how each system has worked in practice, where and when
it has been used. It is a study of the problems that arise under
each system, and of possible solutions to those problems. It is also
a comparative study of economic organization. It examines the relationship of a system to various possible goals of economic life.
Which system is likely to bring the largest output of goods and
services over time? Which system is likely to bring the most equal
distribution of output? of power? Which system is likely to bring
the most stable, unchanging way of economic life? Which system
is most likely to permit the maintenance of personal and political
freedoms?
We shall find that no one system is superior to all others in all
respects. For example, we shall find that an enterprise system is
likely to produce a larger total output of goods and services than
a centrally directed socialist system, but with a less equal distribution of output. The economist as an economist is not competent
to pass final judgment on the relative merits of economic systems.
He possesses no special insights which enable him to say positively
that the size of output is more important than its distribution, that
growth is better than stability. He can only point out what can be
expected of each system. It is then up to the people to determine
which economic system they wish to use.
Economics and right and wrong. The line of thinking presented
above would seem to indicate that the economist should avoid
value judgments altogether. It argues that questions of right and
wrong are related to human value systems with which the economist may be deeply concerned as an individual but not as a scientist.
In this framework, the task of the economist is to develop tech-

THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS

7

niques for analyzing problems so that he can predict what will
happen if a given change is introduced into a given situation. The
responsibility then rests with the people, or those in authority,
armed with this knowledge, to decide whether the consequences
are or are not desirable. Again, given a goal which any group of
people desire, the economist can offer useful advice as to the best
way of attaining that goal. According to this view, the economist
is a technician whose task is to draw up the detailed specifications
for a social and economic structure capable of achieving selected
goals. He does not pass judgment on the goals. In brief, he is a
social engineer, not a social architect.
In general, the authors of this book are in sympathy with this
point of view, subject to one important reservation. As a human
being the economist will have his likes and dislikes, his preferences,
his pet aversions, and his loyalties. As a scientist he must learn to
hold these in check. He must not let them color his conclusions.
But as a scientist he must have one loyalty, even though it too rests
on an assumption. He must believe in the scientific method. What
this phrase means was eloquently expressed by the former president
of the Rockefeller Foundation, Raymond B. Fosdick, in his 1940
Report:
Science is more than the technologies which cluster about it—more than
its inventions and gadgets. It is even more than the discovery and correlation of new facts. Science is a method, a confidence and a faith. It is
a method of controlled and rechecked observations and experiments, objectively recorded with absolute honesty. It is a confidence that truth is
discoverable. It is a faith that truth is worth discovering. . . . The assumption has to be made that there is time for intelligence to take hold,
that the world of the future will still be a free world in which reason rather
than force will control. This assumption may be a leap of faith but it is
only through faith that men will find courage to face, with what intellectual tools they can devise, the towering obstacles ahead.1
Science and freedom are inseparable. The economist cannot be
true to science unless he is free—free to speculate, to criticize, to
compare and to predict, for prediction is the end goal of science.
Freedom is one of the few absolutes which the scientist must recognize. For this reason, we will call that economic system, economic policy, or economic action wrong which seems to present a
clear threat to the maintenance of freedom. Freedom is not at
issue in most of the economic policies and actions discussed in this
book. Consequently, the words, right and wrong, will be used
1

The Rockefeller Foundation, A Review for 1940, pp. 43 and 51.

8

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

sparingly. When they are applied to given actions, we will always
attempt to show why we believe the actions to be directly related
to the maintenance of freedom.
When our study turns from individual actions to total economic
systems, we shall examine the question of whether the opportunity
for personal and political freedom rests on the choice of economic
system. More particularly the question will be asked whether
these freedoms can be maintained in a society using a centrally
directed economic system. This is one of the most important and
controversial questions of our day, but it cannot be discussed intelligently until an understanding is gained of the way in which economic systems based on the two idealized types operate.
However, and for the reasons noted before, most of our study
will be directed to acquiring an understanding of how a private
enterprise system operates, rather than to a study of comparative
economic systems. In explaining how this system operates, we
shall do as an engineer does in explaining the operation of a machine. The engineer does not say that there are two sides to the
question of whether oil or sand is the better lubricant for the moving parts of the machine. He places his approval on oil as the
lubricant. In the same way, as economists, we shall approve of
those actions or policies which are clearly needed to make the enterprise machine run efficiently and we shall disapprove of those
actions and policies which clearly reduce its efficiency. When there
is reasonable doubt about the consequences of a given action, we
shall indicate as much.
Economics and the other branches of learning. There does exist

a central body of materials, problems, and questions which can be
identified as the subject matter of economics. However, these
materials can be understood only through some use of all of the
branches of learning, particularly of the other social sciences. Economics is history to the extent that the economist must turn to
history for an understanding of how economic systems have developed (and declined) and of how they have worked in practice.
Economics is sociology to the extent that the economist must examine the social conditions necessary to permit each type of economic
system to operate efficiently; in the same way, he must give attention to the social consequences that seem to follow from any given
economic system, policy, or action. Economics is psychology to the
extent that it must be based on the behavior of human beings.
Economics is political science to the extent that every economic
system must operate in a political environment and will influence

THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS

V

and be influenced by that environment. Economics is mathematics
in the sense that any science which treats of quantities and relations is mathematics. When it is concerned with the techniques of
production and the natural environment, economics merges with
the physical sciences. Finally, if and when economics approaches
the task of saying what is right and what is wrong, it must turn to
philosophy and religion for standards. The person who would understand economics must never lose sight of the relationships between economics and these other branches of learning.
WHY STUDY ECONOMICS?

If you were living in a totalitarian society, there would be little
reason for you to make an attempt to understand the economic
system of your country. You would have no voice in selecting the
type of system to be used or in solving the broad problems of economic life. Only curiosity would prompt a study of economics.
But you live in a democratic society. Through your votes and
your participation in public life you help determine the policies
of your country. You do have a voice in selecting the type of economic system to be used, and in making it work. If you do not
understand the advantages of the various systems, you cannot make
a reasoned choice among systems. If you prefer one type to another, but only on emotional or intuitive grounds, without any
understanding of its operating requirements, you may, in ignorance,
support measures that will produce results which you neither intended nor desired. In a democratic society everyone—not just the
professional economist—should have some understanding of economics and of the economic system under which he lives.
But doesn't this understanding come automatically through participation in economic life? It is true that each person participates
in economic life, certainly as a consumer, perhaps as a producer,
usually as both. Through this participation, each person gains some
acquaintance with the workings of one or more parts of the economy. But the economy is made up of many, many parts, and the
most important aspect of economic understanding is a knowledge
of how the parts fit together, i.e., a knowledge of economic organization. To understand economic organization, the forest of economic life, it is necessary to know more than the details of a few of
the trees in the forest. For this reason, the average person who
wishes to understand economics must supplement his own experiences with a more or less formal study of economics as such.
At the same time that a study of economics is training for citi-

10

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

zenship, it can contribute to strictly personal goals as well. Most
importantly, it can contribute to your awareness and understanding
of the world about you. The person who has studied architecture
is more "alive" to the world of form and structure in which he lives
than are those of us with untrained perceptions. To the naturalist,
a walk in the woods can be a more exciting and perhaps more
complete experience than to the person who is largely unaware
of the forms and processes of nature. The musician derives a more
complex satisfaction from listening to a symphony than the nonmusician.
In the same way, an understanding of the forms and processes
of economic organization can make even a reading of the daily
paper a more satisfying experience. In other words, an understanding of economics can offer you all of the personal advantages of
knowing over not knowing, of understanding over ignorance. If
you are possessed of any intellectual curiosity, these advantages
alone will compensate you for the time and effort devoted to a
study of economics.
Questions:
1. Distinguish between an economic good and a service; between a free
good and an economic good.
2. What are the two ways of narrowing the gap between what people
want and what they are able to get? Can the economist say which of
these ways is the better?
3. Suppose that, through the intervention of a benevolent uncle, you
were put in a position to satisfy all of your present wants. Do you
think that the gap between what you want and what you are able to
get would then be closed? Why or why not?
4. "The economic organizations of all societies past and present appear
to fall predominantly into one of two classifications or types." Can
you think of any exceptions to this statement? What are the two
types the authors have in mind?
5. List and keep for re-examination at the close of the course the goals
which you think a good economic organization should realize. In
the event that some of the goals conflict with others, indicate by
ranking which you would sacrifice.
6. Write out and file for future reference the definition of economics
that emerges from this chapter and list five major issues which you
think should become clearer as a result of a study of economics.

Features Common
to AAI Economic Systems

I N THE next chapter we shall begin a rather detailed study of how a particular economic system
operates, the one that has come to be known as "private enterprise." In this chapter we shall consider certain features of economic life that are common to all economies involving specialization
and exchange. This chapter and Chapter 3 are designed to present
a "view of the whole," a broad outline into which we shall later
insert the details. As you proceed through the book, an occasional
rereading of these chapters may assist you in tying together the
varied materials on the structure and operation of an enterprise
system.
Economic life under a private enterprise is not totally unlike economic Me under other forms of economic organization. The famous
visitor from Mars would probably have difficulty recognizing that
different peoples were working under different economic systems.
Wherever he visited in the Western world he would find men and
women going to work in factories, shops, mills and mines, and on
farms. He would find them working with complex pieces of machinery, on special tasks, and under the direction of "bosses." Only
by going behind these external activities to the methods used in
guiding, motivating, and rewarding the people would he be able
to perceive that differences do exist. The external features of economic life common to all modern forms of economic organization
are the subject matter of this section.
Wants. To be human is to want food, clothing, shelter, and other
economic goods. Certainly, then, the existence of wants cannot be
accepted as a distinguishing feature of private enterprise. Human
11

12

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

wants are the mainspring of all economic action, whether that action is to take place under the rules of private enterprise or of a
centrally directed economic system.
To be human is also to want more of these economic goods than
can be supplied. Thus even the existence of unsatisfied wants is not
unique to private enterprise. Neither history nor our knowledge of
human nature gives us any reason to believe that any economic
system, however efficient, will ever be able to produce enough
goods and services to satisfy all the wants of all the people.
Resources. To obtain economic goods, the people of all societies
must produce, and to produce is to use resources. The basic resources are everywhere the same: (a) man and (b) nature. These
are man's only weapons against scarcity, and how well he succeeds
in satisfying his wants depends on how well he uses these resources.
Economists use the term land to refer to all natural resources in
their natural states. When these resources have been processed and
delivered to consumers, they become consumer goods. When they
have been processed but, instead of being delivered to consumers,
are used as instruments in the production of other goods, they become capital goods. The fabricating of nature's resources into instruments of production—the use of capital goods—is common to
all but the most primitive economies. If by capitalism we mean
an economic system using capital goods, then even modern communism is a form of capitalism!
Nor is the existence of a class of specialists in collecting and guiding resources for the purpose of production, i.e., the existence of a
management group, unique to private enterprise. In all forms of
economic organization, some persons must perform the management role, whether as private, profit-seeking businessmen, farmers,
etc., or as employees of the State. A boss-worker relationship is inevitable in any economy where large numbers of men must work
at a common task.
All the nonmanagement contributions of man to the process of
production are identified by the term labor. The four basic
resources recognized by economists—land, labor, capital, and management—are common to all modern forms of economic organization.
Specialization. Another characteristic feature of modern economic life is specialization. Any group of people who want to
attain even reasonable efficiency in producing goods and services
must divide the various tasks involved in production among various
individuals and regions so that each person and each region is used

FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

13

to the best advantage. Chapter 4 is devoted to a study of this
characteristic of modern economies.
Money. Specialization involves the exchange of goods and services, and exchange on any but the simplest scale necessarily involves the use of money. Money is defined as anything that is
generally accepted in exchange for goods and services. Some of
the most important problems that confront a private enterprise
economy arise from the use of money, but neither the problems nor
the use of money itself is unique to the private enterprise form of
economic organization.
The circular flow. Whatever the form of economic organization,
the basic processes of economic life consist of a circular flow between households and firms. The household is the basic consuming unit in economic life. It is usually centered around the family
unit. The firm is the basic producing unit in economic life. It may
be a grocery store (privately or publicly owned), a steel mill (again
privately or publicly owned), or a farm ("collective" or otherwise).
The distinguishing characteristic of the firm, whatever the form of
economic organization, is that it is a collection of resources brought
together under centralized direction for the production of a particular good or goods.
The heart of the circular flow is the movement of resource services (the services of land, labor, capital, and management) from
the households to the firms, and the reverse movement of goods and
services from the firms to the households. This, the primary circuit,
is illustrated in Fig. 2-1.
Resource Services

.Goods and Services

FIG. 2-1

In any economy employing money, there exists a second circuit,
which may be called the monetary circuit. Households in a modern economy do not "barter" their resource services for goods.
Rather they exchange them for money, and then exchange the
money for goods. Thus the monetary circuit consists of a flow

14

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

of money from the firms to the households, and a reverse flow of
money (in the form of payments for goods and services) from the
households to the firms. The double-circuit flow is illustrated in
Fig. 2-2. Theflowof money income payments from firms to house-

Goods and Services
Payments to Hoosefco\as

FIG. 2-2

holds represents expenses of production from the point of view of
thefirmsand income from the point of view of the households. Similarly the money payments to firms for goods and services represent
the consumption expenditures of households and the gross revenues
of the firms.
This circular flow (sometimes known as the "wheel of wealth")
is common to all modern economies; it exists whether resources are
publicly or privately owned and whether the decisions that produce
the flow are made through a market mechanism or in the offices
of a central planning board.
THE NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS
The economic well being of the people in a society is largely
determined by the size, the distribution, and the regularity of the
flow of goods and services from firms to households as described
in the preceding diagrams. For this reason, measurements of these
(and other) aspects of the flow are important materials in economic analysis, regardless of the type of economic system under
study. These measurements are usually referred to as the National
Income Accounts.1
The problems involved in arriving at even rough estimates of the
total flow and of various components of the total flow are extremely
complex. In this section, we shall make no attempt to deal with the
more complex conceptual problems that are involved in national
1

In this country, the most comprehensive of such measurements are undertaken by
the Department of Commerce.

FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

15

income accounting. However, because of the importance attached
to national income accounting in modern economics, we have included in an Appendix a step-by-step picture of the construction
and interpretation of the national accounts. In this section we shall
be concerned with the uses to which the accounts may be put,
with the conceptual framework of national income accounting, with
a description of the important elements in the accounts, and with
the reliability and usefulness of the accounts for the purposes of
economic policy-making.
Important uses of national income accounts. Some of the more
important uses of the income accounts are: (1) They may be used
in rough comparisons of the economic well being of a people at one
period of time to their well being at other periods of time. For example, they provide us with rough answers to the question, "Are
we better or worse off than we were twenty (or fifty) years ago?"
(2) They may be used in (very) rough comparisons of the economic welfare of the people in one country to the welfare of the
peoples in other countries where such measurements are attempted.
Is the American level of living higher or lower than that of Canada?
of Sweden? By how much? These are the kinds of questions to
which the national accounts provide approximate answers. (3)
Measurements of the various components of the total flow provide
valuable information on the structure of production, i.e., on what
types of goods are produced and in what amounts, and on the relationships over time among the various components. How much of
the total consists of nondurable consumer goods? of durable consumer goods? of durable producers' goods? What is the relationship between changes in the output of consumer goods and changes
in the output of producer's durables? (4) The national income
accounts provide valuable information on the phenomenon of alternating waves of prosperity and depression—on what happens
during the course of such cycles, on why the wave-like movements
take place, on what the business outlook is at any moment of time,
on what might be done to smooth out the extremes of boom and
bust. The adequacy of the currently available national income accounts for these purposes will be discussed in a later section.
The concept of national income. Any given national income figure is at best a statistical abstraction. It is a number, more or less
arbitrary, certainly artificial, which is to stand for something real;
but for what? Just what does a national income total measure?
Let us begin an answer to this question with a description of the
various meanings that may be attached to the single word, income.

16

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

Three types of income. Economics is concerned with the satisfaction of human wants. From this it follows that a person's income might be thought of as the flow of satisfactions received by
that person over a given period of time. This type of income is referred to as psychic income and is clearly the type of income that
is relevant to questions of human welfare. Unfortunately, there is
no standard unit for measuring satisfactions, nor any convenient
way of using such a unit if one existed.
An income measure that avoids the problem of measuring satisfactions, and is useful in its own right, is one that deals with the
flow of goods and services received by an individual over a given
period of time. This is referred to as real income. Unfortunately,
even this flow of real goods and services cannot be measured directly because of the diverse character of the items that enter into
the flow. How are pounds of pork chops to be added to gallons of
milk, to bushels of wheat, to some number of haircuts? No meaningful sum could be obtained by adding a collection of such numbers.
An income measure that avoids this difficulty, as well as the difficulty of measuring satisfactions, is one that deals only with money,
that is simply a count of the number of dollars received by a person
over a given period of time. This is referred to as money income.
For a given person, and with some difficulty, money income measures can be turned into rough measures of real income; with even
greater difficulty, real income measures can be turned into very
rough measures of psychic income. When it is the income of a
nation which is involved, rather than that of a single person, these
transformations become even more difficult and the resulting estimates even less reliable. However, money income and real income
measures are useful in and of themselves.
The unit of measurement. The unit of measurement in national
income accounting is the standard money unit of the country, e.g.,
the dollar in this country and the pound in Great Britain, the franc
in France, the mark in Germany, etc. This is not the same as saying
that all national income accounts deal with money income only.
Rather it means that every item in whatever total is being measured, whether it be money income, real income, or something else,
is assigned a dollar value, and the dollar values are then summed
to arrive at the total. This is done, as was described above, because the money unit is practically the only standard unit in which
each of the items can be expressed.
The flow to be measured. The two-circuit wheel of wealth de-

FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

17

scribes four separate flows: (1) the flow of resource services to the
firms, (2) the flow of goods and services to the households, (3) the
flow of money to the firms in the form of payments for goods and
services, and (4) the flow of money to the households in the form
of payments for resource services. Only the first of these—the flow
of resource services to thefirms—isof little use in the problem at
hand. The other three flows can all be used as rough approximations of the income of a society. In fact, all three are used at one
time or another in modern national income accounting. The question of when each flow should be used in developing certain aggregates would take us into a more sophisticated analysis than is
necessary or advisable at this point. It is sufficient to know that
the national accounts may make use of (1) the total value of goods
and services produced, or (2) the total expenditures for those goods
and services, or (3) the total income payments to resource owners.
The time period. The magnitude of a continuous flow, whether
of water or of goods and services, must be measured in terms of a
rate, i.e., in terms of quantity per period of time. The flow of
water through a main, for example, is often measured in terms of
the number of gallons per hour passing through the main. The time
period used in National Income Accounting is usually one year.
The use of any arbitrary time period creates difficulties (see Appendix A), and the one-year period is as convenient (or inconvenient)
as any other. On other grounds, the one-year period has much to
recommend it. For example, many of the data used in national
income accounts are derived from individual accounts constructed
with one year as the accounting period.
The important aggregates. Measurements of the flow of goods
and services to an economy over a given time span give rise to several meaningful sums, rather than one. National Income, in the
technical sense in which it will be described below, is but one of
these sums (or aggregates). The most important aggregates developed in national income accounting are (1) Gross National Product (GNP), (2) Net National Product, (3) National Income, (4)
Personal Income, and (5) Disposable Personal Income.
Gross National Product. The total output of goods and services
of the economy over a given period of time is called the Gross National Product for that period of time. This output is measured in
money values, for the reasons already outlined. To make sure that
each unit of a particular good or service is counted but once and
to take account of the fact that not all goods attain the finished
stage in the course of a given time period, the money value to be

18

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

used in the total is assigned to the unit at the highest stage of production it has reached during the period. This avoids the error
that would be involved, for example, in counting both the value of
the flour and the value of the wheat from which that flour was
made.
Net National Product. In the course of producing the goods and
services that enter into Gross National Product, some "using up" of
the capital goods of the economy is inevitable. When this depreciation of capital goods is subtracted from the Gross National Product, the remainder is the Net National Product of the economy.
This, too, is expressed in terms of money values.
National Income. Both Gross National Product and Net National
Product are aggregates based on the output of goods and services.
National Income is an aggregate based on the incomes earned in
the production of those goods and services. If the entire value of
the Net National Product were passed on to the earned-income accounts, the money value of the Net National Product would be
exactly equal to the money incomes earned in the production process, i.e., Net National Product would be exactly equal to National
Income. In fact, not all of the money value of the goods and services produced can be credited to the earned-income account. Out
of this money value the firms who do the producing must pay various indirect taxes to various units of government. However, a
money value can be assigned to these indirect taxes, and National
Income can be derived directly from Net National Product. National Income is equal to Net National Product minus indirect business taxes.
Personal Income. Personal Income is the income actually received by households during the given period. If the firms were to
pass on all of the earned income to the household, Personal Income
would be exactly equal to National Income. However, firms may
retain some of the earned income (or they may pay out more than
has been earned). Also, the firms must pay taxes on their earnings
(profit), and this reduces the total that is available for payment
to households. Finally, households often receive payments from
the various units of governments in the form of social security
benefits, pensions, etc. These payments which do not represent payments of earned income are referred to as transfer payments. Thus
Personal Income is equal to National Income minus retained profits
and taxes on profits and plus transfer payments.
Disposable Personal Income. If there were no levies on the incomes received by households, the total amount of money which

FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

19

the households could dispose of as they wish would be equal to
Personal Income. However, some part of Personal Income must
always be used to pay the various personal taxes levied by the various units of government. Thus, Disposable Personal Income is
equal to Personal Income minus personal taxes.
THE COMPONENTS OF TOTAL SPENDING
The Gross National Product is a measure of the total spending
of all economic units for goods and services over the given period of
time. This aggregate, total spending, is an important aggregate in
economic analysis. For example, it is used extensively in the analysis of business cycles. Of equal importance are the various components of total spending. The components of total spending are
identified in terms of the types of goods purchased and also in terms
of the sources of total spending.
Types of goods purchased. In terms of types of goods purchased,
total spending may be broken down into (1) spending for consumer goods and (2) spending for producers' goods. Each of these
types of spending may, in turn, be broken down into (1) spending
for durable goods and (2) spending for nondurable goods. Sometimes government-produced goods and services are added to
consumer goods and producers' goods to yield a three-way classification.
Sources of spending. The total spending in an economy is the
sum of the spending by four different source groups: consumers,
private investors, units of government, and foreign buyers. Consumption spending by households is the largest single element in
the spending total. Investment spending (the purchase of producers' goods) by firms, while usually much smaller in total than consumption spending, is of great importance in economic analysis.
For example, the level of this type of spending is an important determinant of the rate of economic progress. A high level of investment spending means that a large number of buildings, machines,
tools, etc., are being added to the productive equipment of the
economy, which normally means a larger output of goods and services in the future. Investment spending is also one of the most volatile elements in total spending, i.e., it is subject to rapid swings
from one level to another. For this reason, investment spending
comes in for close scrutiny in the study of business cycles.
Government spending is assuming an ever-more important role
in the total spending in modern economies. The reasons for this
need not concern us here; it is important only to recognize that

20

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

the various units of government represent an important source of
total spending, both because of the volume of the spending and because of the directness with which it can be changed in response
to public policy decisions.
Foreign spending is the fourth type of spending; it varies in importance from country to country. The purchase of English goods
and services by buyers in other countries is a very important element in the total spending for the output of the English economy.
While less important to our own economy, foreign spending is still
a significant variable in the spending equation.
SOME IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIPS

The major part of the National Income of a country is usually
spent directly on consumer goods. That part of the National Income which is not so used, which is not spent on consumer goods,
is described by the economist as savings. It follows from this that
National Income is equal to consumption spending plus savings.
If National Income is designated as Y, consumption spending as C,
and savings as S, this relationship may be expressed in the equation, Y = C + S.
If we now view National Income in terms of the expenditures
for goods and services and if we classify all expenditures as being
made either for consumption goods or producer's goods (investment), it follows that National Income is also equal to consumption
spending plus investment spending. If investment spending is designated as I, this relationship may be expressed in the equation,

Y = C + I.
No involved algebraic manipulation is needed to show that, if
Y = C + S and Y = C + I, then S must be equal to I. That is,
savings is equal to investment. This relationship will come in for
more intensive study in various later sections, particularly those
dealing with business cycle analysis.2
THE LIMITATIONS OF NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS

Even the most sanguine of national income accountants would
not claim perfect accuracy for his figures. The figures obtained are
at best but rough approximations of the true figures. The question
2
We have presented here a very simplified statement of these relationships. The
equations can be expanded to take account of government expenditures and receipts and
of exports and imports, but the basic equality between realized savings and investment
remains. We shall develop the more complex patterns as the need for them as analytical
tools arises, particularly in the discussion of business cycles and foreign trade.

FEATURES COMMON TO ALL ECONOMIC SYSTEMS

21

is not whether error exists but whether it is of such magnitude as
to destroy the usefulness of the accounts. No single answer can be
given to this question; an error that would not be serious when the
figures are being used for one purpose may be very serious when
another purpose is involved.
In general the figures obtained are more valid measures of money
income than of real income, and more valid measures of real income than of psychic income. Changes in money income reflect
changes in two types of variables, prices and quantities. Changes
in real income require figures that reflect only changes in quantities. This necessitates the "deflating" of money income figures to
eliminate the influence of price changes. However, this process
opens the door to other uncertainties (see Appendix A) and the
validity of the resulting estimates as measures of real income
changes is always open to some question.
It is even more difficult to make valid inter-temporal or intercountry comparisons of psychic income. The precise relationship
between real income and psychic income for even a given individual is so difficult to determine that the transformation of real
income into psychic income measures is almost impossible.
Another important use for the national income accounts is in
forecasting, particularly in forecasting the level of spending and employment at some date in the future. For this purpose not only
must the various aggregates be relatively accurate, but also the
movement over time of those aggregates and the relationships
among them must be predictable. Results obtained so far in the
use of national income accounts for purposes of forecasting would
not seem to justify undue optimism. However, the continuing improvements in both data and techniques may warrant some optimism about the possibility of accurate economic forecasting in
the future.
Questions:
1. Discuss each of the statements below.
(a) "A distinguishing feature of the private enterprise system is that
the people under it always want more goods and services than can
be produced."
(b) "A distinguishing feature of the private enterprise system is that
the firms use capitalistic methods of production."
(c) "A distinguishing feature of the private enterprise system is the
fact that a worker must take orders from a boss."

22

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

2. (a) Identify in general terms the two circuits that constitute the
wheel of wealth.
(b) Identify the two flows that make up each of these circuits.
(c) Which of these four flows is most significant for problems of
economic welfare? Why?
3.

(a) Trace the direct path of relationship between Gross National
Product and Disposable Personal Income.
(b) Under what circumstances would it be possible for the sum of
Personal Income and profits taxes to be greater than National Income?
(c) Is it possible for a people to consume more goods in a given
year than they produce in that year? If so, then how?

4. Explain how it is possible for the real income of a nation to decrease
and, at the same time, for its money income to increase.
5. Do you think that the average American today is happier than the
average American a hundred years ago? Describe some of the problems that are encountered in answering a question of this kind.

The Private Enterprise System:
Preview

AN THE preceding chapter economic life was described as a process in which resource services
flow to firms where they are put to use in the production of goods
and services. The flow of these goods and services from the firms
to the households completes the primary circuit of the wheel of
wealth. The wheel of wealth is a generalized description of economic life, applicable to all types of economic systems.
If economics as a social science were to go no further than a
description of this general pattern, it would be of very limited usefulness. The most important questions about economic life are
concerned with the forces that drive and direct the two flows that
make up the primary circuit of the wheel of wealth. What causes
the wheel to turn? How are the decisions made that result in particular resource services being used by particular firms to turn out
particular goods and services?
Answers to these questions must be sought in the area of economic organization, i.e., in the arrangements used to make (and
enforce) the critical decisions in economic life (see pp. 5-6). This
book is largely concerned with a detailed study of how the socalled free private enterprise system operates. Starting with the
next chapter, we shall cover this ground "on foot," moving slowly,
with frequent pauses to examine at close range some particular
aspect of an enterprise system. This chapter may be thought of as
a trip "by plane" over the same area. It presents a brief picture of
the enterprise system—what it is, how it developed, how it works.
23

24

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
WHAT IS THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM?

A definition. A private enterprise type of economic organization
is one in which (1) the critical decisions in economic life are made
by self-seeking individuals, guided by prices and disciplined by
competition; (2) most of the means of production are privately
owned and controlled; and (3) rewards are approximately in proportion to contributions.
A brief history. Some insight into the characteristics of the system can be gained by examining how and why this type of
economic organization developed. Certain features of free enterprise can be found in all economic systems, even those of primitive
man. However, the system cannot be found in anything like complete form until we reach the England and America of the late
18th and early 19th centuries. Free enterprise did not develop in
these countries at this time as a result of a deliberate plan. Rather
it came in by the "back door," as the existing form of economic
organization—mercantilism—gradually broke down. Mercantilism
was a set of economic policies directed to the goal of making the
nation stronger than its rivals. The policies called for substantial
control by the government of the economic life of the people of
the country and its colonies—what they should consume, what they
should produce, where and at what wages they should work, where
they should invest their money, etc. Mercantilist theory and mercantilist practice were based on the assumption that there was an
inherent and inevitable conflict between the national interest and
the selfish interests of the individuals who made up the nation.
The restrictions that the British parliament placed on the economic life of her American colonies were part of mercantilist policy.
The discontent produced by these restrictions was one of the factors leading to the American Revolution. Within England, too, this
system of controls became more and more unpopular and more
openly violated. For example, it is estimated that, at one time in
the 18th century, more than one-fourth of the population of the
coastal areas of England was engaged in smuggling, particularly in
bringing in forbidden goods from France. Gradually the detailed
regulations such as the one making it a crime to wear anything
made of colored calico, were modified or repealed. Step by step
the economic life of England was freed from the excessive control
of mercantilism, and free enterprise was under way.
Free enterprise came into existence as a reaction to detailed
government control of economic life. Its further development was

THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM

25

promoted when the free enterprise idea was presented in positive
form. Many writers contributed to the idea, but it was left to the
Scottish philosopher, Adam Smith, to give the first reasonably
rounded account of how such a system might be expected to work.
In his famous book, The Wealth of Nations, which, incidentally,
appeared in the same year (1776) as our Declaration of Independence, Smith demonstrated that a country's interests can be
effectively served by permitting each person to make his own
decisions and follow his own self-interest in economic life. This
is the central idea of the free enterprise system.1
HOW DOES THE SYSTEM WORK?

But how can an economic system work in which each person is
left free to do as he pleases? How can the activities of farmers,
miners, factory workers, businessmen, etc., be coordinated without
some person or group exercising central control? Let us start our
answer to this question by recalling the problems of organization
which must be solved by any kind of economic organization. The
problems are: (a) to decide what is to be produced and in what
amounts, (b) who is to perform each of the tasks involved, and (c)
how much each person is to get as his share of the output.
The "what" decision. Under an enterprise system the "what" decision is made by the consumer. Through the way he spends his
dollars he determines what is going to be produced and in what
amounts. When he wants more cars and fewer horsedrawn carriages, he casts more of his dollar "votes" for cars and fewer for carriages. This control by the consumer of what is to be produced is
often referred to as consumer sovereignty. We shall study the decision-making of consumers under the general heading of demand.
The "who" decision. Profits and losses. The dollar "votes" of
consumers represent the orders to the firms in the economy telling
them what they should produce and in what amounts. However,
each firm is free to produce whatever it pleases. What assurance
is there, then, that the firms will produce the things wanted by consumers? The answer is that the more votes there are for a good,
the more dollars there are for the firms producing the good; the less
votes, the fewer the dollars. The reward for obeying the consumers
is profits; the penalty for disobeying is losses. It is the desire for
profits and the fear of losses which lead the managers of the firms
1
The idea that a good society can be grounded on self-interest appears to many to
involve a self-contradiction. For a statement of Adam Smith's reconciliation of selfinterest with his strong ethical views regarding right and wrong, see pp. 33-34.

26

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

to do the bidding of consumers—to produce more cars and fewer
horse-drawn carriages. Because profits can be made only by producing something that consumers want and consider useful, production for profits becomes just one way of getting production for use.
Profits and losses are part of the signal system of an enterprise
economy. They guide firms into the production of the things more
wanted by consumers and out of the production of the things less
wanted by consumers. Profits and losses have a very important
function to perform in an enterprise economy. We shall discuss the
responses of firms to the dollar votes of consumers under the heading of supply.
Freedom of job choice. The managers of firms cannot produce
goods without help. To begin with,, they need the help of workers.
How are workers assigned to the various tasks under an enterprise
system? The answer is that each worker decides where and at what
job he is going to work. What assurance is there, then, that the
workers will follow the wants of consumers, that they will work at
the job of producing cars rather than carriages? The answer lies in
the fact that the workers, like the managers of firms, are guided by
self-interest. They wish to make higher wages and avoid wage cuts.
If they want higher wages and continuous employment, they will
work for the firms producing cars, the firms that have received the
most dollar votes with which to pay workers.
Wages, too, are an important part of the signal system of an
enterprise economy. Relative wages, in combination with employment opportunities, guide workers into the production of the things
wanted by consumers and out of the production of things that are not
wanted. Profits and relative wages also determine in part where
particular economic activities will be carried on. That is, if wages are
higher in one part of a country than another, workers will tend to
move from the low wage areas to the high wage areas, and firms
will tend to move from the high wage areas to the low wage areas.
This movement tends to equalize wages and makes for a better use
of resources. We shall give particular attention in our chapters on
wages and on wage problems to this function of relative wages.
Private property. It takes more than the labor of human beings
to produce goods in a modern industrialized economy. It takes
land, buildings, tools and machinery, raw materials, and power as
well. What assurance is there that these nonhuman resources will
do the bidding of consumers? The answer lies in one of the distinguishing features of free enterprise: private ownership of the
means of production. Each unit of land, each building, each tool,

THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM

27

and each machine is owned by some person or persons. The owners
of these resources receive incomes from selling the services of their
resources to the firms. The firms producing cars will be able to
offer better opportunities—higher rents, higher interest rates, and
higher prices—to the owners of the land, capital, and raw materials
than will the firms producing carriages. The necessary nonhuman
resources will move into the car industry and out of the carriage
industry.
Self-interest, made effective by the device of private property,
leads the owners of the nonhuman resources to put them to the uses
which consumers desire. Rent on land, interest on capital, the
prices of raw materials—all these are parts of the signal system of
an enterprise economy. They serve to guide the nonhuman resources into the most productive uses.
It can be seen from this discussion that private property in an
enterprise system is simply a device to assure that the nonhuman
resources needed in production will be put to their best uses. Private property can be justified on the basis of the important function
which it performs and need not be justified on any ethical grounds.
We shall be concerned with the ethical question of private property
when we turn to an examination of other types of economic organization.
The "how much" decision. The consumers have selected the
things to be produced; the firms have used the resources, both
human and nonhuman, to produce the desired goods and services.
The only problem remaining is how to divide this output among
the people in the economy. On what basis is this division made
under free enterprise?
In the first place, each unit of each good (each car, each loaf of
bread) goes to that person who is willing to pay the most for it. In
effect, the prospective buyers of a given stock of a given commodity
keep bidding up the price of the commodity. As the price goes up,
the buyers who would prefer to spend their available resources on
other goods keep dropping out. Eventually a price is reached at
which the quantity that buyers are willing to take is just equal to
the quantity available. This will be the going price, the price which
"clears the market." This is simply a rationing process under which
goods go to those who are willing to give up the most to get them.
Other things being equal, this will lead to the goods being used in
such a way as to satisfy the most wants. We shall discuss this and
other rationing schemes in later chapters.
The total amount of goods a person will be able to buy will de-

28

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

pend on the prices of the goods and on the size of his income. In
general, the size of each person's income depends on the productivity of the resources which he owns. For example, the more productive the labor of a worker, the more will firms be willing to pay
for that labor, and the higher will be the income of the worker. By
distributing income on this basis each person is given an incentive
to put his resources in those uses where they will be the most productive (where they will contribute most to satisfying consumer
wants). This way of distributing income is essential to the system
because it provides the incentive needed to get people to do the
bidding of consumers. At the same time, this way of distributing
income always produces an unequal distribution of income. This
fact can lead to serious problems if the people of the society are
not willing to accept a substantial amount of inequality in the distribution of income. We shall have occasion to consider later how
far and in what ways income can be redistributed in an enterprise
economy without destroying the incentives and the signals which
are necessary if it is to operate effectively.
Economic progress. The level of living of a people can be improved by moving resources from low-productivity to high-productivity uses, from uses where they satisfy few wants to uses where
they satisfy more wants. However, sustained and rapid improvement
in levels of living usually requires more than this. It requires not
only a better use of the given resources but also an improvement in
the quality of resources, an increase in the quantity of resources
available (particularly, the nonhuman resources), and an improvement in the techniques of production. These are the three basic
elements in economic progress.
How is economic progress promoted under an enterprise system?
The answer again is self-interest. Self-interest leads the worker to
increase his productivity so that he contributes more wherever he
works. Self-interest leads other people to search for new sources of
raw materials, and for ways of making existing supplies go further.
It leads the managers of firms to seek new and better ways of doing
things. Self-interest is the driving force behind economic progress
in an enterprise economy. That it is a potent driving force is
demonstrated by the record of progress in the United States under
this system. That it involves stresses and strains will become clear
when we enquire into the causes of the business cycle. We know
that economic progress is possible under private enterprise. We
shall have occasion later to consider whether it is equally possible
under a centrally directed type of economic organization.

THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM

29

The role of saving. One thing is clear: progress is not cost-less.
It requires frequent and sometimes unwelcome personal adjustments. In addition, it requires saving. Resources which could be
used to make more things of immediate usefulness—more food, more
clothing, more cars and refrigerators—must be devoted to increasing
the quantity and improving the quality of resources, and supporting those who are busy devising new and better ways of organizing
resources.
Saving, from the point of view of society as a whole, occurs when
resources are released from the production of consumption goods.
These savings are always made by individuals, voluntarily or involuntarily. They occur whenever a person refrains from spending
all his income. But whether such savings result in social saving
depends upon the use of the savings. If they are borrowed and
spent by a spendthrift, there is no saving from the social point of
view. What A saves, B spends. Only as they are used to maintain
and improve the apparatus of production do they permit a people
as a whole to live better in the future.
Saving is necessary to economic progress under any type of economic organization. Under centrally directed systems, the central
planning group decides how much is to be saved, who are to do the
saving, and how the savings are to be used. Under the enterprise
system these three decisions are left to individuals. In later chapters
we shall explain how the system is supposed to bring it about that
all that individuals choose to save will be put to effective use, and
what happens when people save and their savings, for some reason
or other, fail to be put to effective use.
The role of competition. The system just described will not work
efficiently under any and all conditions. Perhaps the most important
requirement is that of competition. A brief but precise definition of
competition is difficult to construct. We shall content ourselves
with a meaningful but rather inexact definition at this time. Competition is rivalry for income by the method of offering more for
less. It was Adam Smith's recognition of this force that led him to
predict that, in any society in which competition was protected and
encouraged, there would be an essential harmony between individual self-interest and the national interest; that individuals, in striving to promote their own interest, would, without being aware of it,
promote those of their fellows. Competition is the disciplining force
in all buying and selling activities. Buyers compete against buyers,
sellers against sellers, workers against workers, employers against

30

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

employers, savers against savers, landlords against landlords, and so
on, throughout the whole range of economic life.
International trade. So far we have been discussing the operation
of an enterprise economy as if there were no other countries in the
world but the one under study. Actually every country that attempts to use an enterprise system is part of a world economy. As
we shall see, trade between the peoples of different nations develops for the same reason that it does between the people of Indiana
and the people of Florida. By specializing, by taking advantage of
the distribution of natural and human resources, the people in each
area can produce more than would be possible without trade. We
shall give considerable attention to the nature, mechanics, and problems of international trade in later chapters.
The role of government. The enterprise system is often (and
rightly) associated with the concept of laissez-faire. Literally interpreted, this phrase means "leave it alone." When applied to economic life laissez-faire is usually understood to mean that the
government should let the people do as they wish and should keep
its hands off the economy. But this is only a half-truth. Although
an enterprise system is designed to operate without detailed central
control and direction, the government nevertheless has a very important role to play in making the system work.
Providing a reliable money. One of the most important responsibilities of government is related to the use of money in economic
life. Money is anything that is generally accepted in exchange for
goods and services. The primary function of money is to simplify
the processes of exchange. In the next chapter we shall describe
the importance of money in our modern world in which almost
everything is produced for sale and not for the producer's own use.
Then, in Chapters 22 through 26, we shall show what governments
can do to provide a reliable money and what happens when a people lose confidence in the goodness of their money.
Providing the "rules of the game." As we have already indicated,
self-interest is a powerful force. It is doubtful whether any human
society could get along without it. Yet it must be channeled and
directed if it is not to be destructive. Competition is one of the
channeling forces. But government must set the rules of the competitive game. First of all government must define permissible
action in such a way that the game is played competitively. Maintaining competition is one of the most important (and most vexing)
responsibilities of government. It is evident that the definition of
permissible action must prevent persons from getting ahead by

THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM

31

fraud, robbery, murder, etc. In other words, it is the responsibility
of government to maintain law and order. Further government
must enforce contractual obligations. Free individuals cooperate
with one another on the basis of written and unwritten contracts.
If these contracts are not honored, the whole system breaks down.
Fortunately the enforcement problem is not serious since the overwhelming majority of contracts express the mutual interest of the
parties that make them.
For the moment these indications of the role of government suffice. When we come to the discussion of the State in an enterprise
economy in Chapter 20 we shall have occasion to note that there
are many other things which government must do if an enterprise
economy is to be an effective method of economic organization.

THE PROBLEMS OF FREE ENTERPRISE
Nothing created and operated by man is ever perfect. This is
true of the enterprise type of economic organization—and of every
other type of economic organization. Hence there are always problems. Some of the problems of the enterprise system are unique to
that system; others are found in most or all economic systems.
One group of problems is related to maintaining the conditions
necessary for the enterprise system to operate effectively. Two
problems from this group were identified in the discussion of the
role of government: maintaining competition and providing a sound
money system. These two problems never seem to be solved in any
permanent sense. They require continuous attention and constant
vigilance on the part of the citizens and their elected representatives.
We shall stress the role of the citizen in problem solving because
government action is often the source of the particular problem
rather than the solution of the problem. This is not a criticism of
the democratic form of government. Rather it is a recognition of
the fact that short-run political expediency and good economics do
not necessarily coincide. They can be brought into rough correspondence if the citizens understand the operating requirements of
an enterprise system and really want their representatives to protect
and promote these requirements.
The maintenance of this rough correspondence is made more
difficult by the fact that it is always to the advantage of a particular
economic group to escape from the disciplines of competition. At
the same time it is to the advantage of each group that all other
groups should remain subject to these disciplines. Workers seek to

32

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

escape competition in their own activities but usually insist that the
business firms of the country be exposed to competition. In the
same way businessmen (or farmers or professional men) seek to
escape competition, but insist that workers shall compete for jobs.
This struggle may force all groups to accept the disciplines of competition, or it may result in each group acquiring some degree of
monopoly control of its own market.
This second result is described with delightful satire in a book
by A. S. J. Baster entitled, The Little Less.2 Baster describes how
the economy of Great Britain was converted into a caricature of an
enterprise system between the two World Wars. This came about
by the simple process of allowing each economic group to try to
get ahead by offering less for more, rather than more for less. Output restriction was permitted, even encouraged, in one activity after
another. The result: all elements in the economy were reduced to
a lower level of living. Whether we shall continue to use an enterprise system in the United States depends largely upon whether the
interplay of so-called "pressure groups" produces a workably competitive economy or a restrictionist, monopolistic economy.
To understand the activities of pressure groups it is necessary to
understand the problems of economic life as they are seen by the
individuals who make up the groups. These problems are usually
related to one or more of the following considerations: the absolute
size of each man's income; the size of his income relative to that of
others; the relative continuity of his income; the conditions under
which the income is earned; and the prospects of improvement over
time in both the amount of the income and the conditions of employment.3
These general problems are reflected in the specific problems
which we shall discuss in later chapters: the business cycle; labormanagement relations; distress in agriculture; the insecurities due
to age, unemployment, industrial accidents, etc.; and international
economic relations.
In analyzing each problem, the authors will begin by asking if the
problem arises out of some inherent shortcomings of the enterprise
system or out of some remediable failure in the operation of the
system. If the problem can be reduced or eliminated by improving
the operation of the system, the proper line of action is relatively
2

A. S. J. Baster, The Little Less, Methuen, London: 1947.
Apparently men resent personal inequalities much less in a society in which they
can look forward to a steady improvement in their lot, and the lot of their children,
than in one which offers no such hope.
3

THE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE SYSTEM

33

easy to define, although it may be difficult to enact. If the problem
would exist even if the system were operating just as it should, the
solution will involve difficult decisions. In this event, it may well
be that the best alternative is to accept the problem and learn to
live with it. This will be true if the people decide that the c u r e changing to another type of economic organization—is worse than
the disease. No economic system can solve all problems, and the
people must decide which system on balance is best suited to their
purposes.
This statement will take on more meaning after we have examined the advantages and the disadvantages of other economic
systems. At this point it is important only to warn the reader not
to expect that the enterprise system can solve all the social and
economic problems of life.
A note on self-interest. The discussion of this chapter has made
it clear that the force which moves men to action under the enterprise system is self-interest. This motivation has been partly
responsible for the widespread doubts concerning the ethical rightness of the enterprise system. No thoughtful person can defend a
system that he believes to be ethically wrong. This idea of ethical
Tightness is so important that it is well to see how one man at least
reconciled the motive of self-interest with his own strong concepts
of right and wrong. The Adam Smith who wrote The Wealth of
Nations was also the man who earlier wrote (1759) The Theory of
Moral Sentiments. He was deeply concerned with questions of morality, of right and wrong. How did this man of strong moralistic
bent reconcile his ethics and his economics? His reasoning ran
somewhat as follows:
Man is a normal animal, animated by sympathy for his fellow as well
as regard for himself and his immediate family. He wants the respect and
esteem of his neighbors; he wants to serve the general welfare. But he
has no intuitive way of knowing how he can best do this. Fortunately
the prices which come into existence in a regime based on private property and private enterprise tell him where his services will prove most
useful. If a thing is scarce relative to the wants of consumers it will command a high price; if abundant it will command a low price. The individual who shifts his resources from the making of things that are in
relative abundance to the making of things that are relatively scarce
serves his fellows, and the fact that he prospers by doing this in no wise
detracts from the usefulness of his act. At the same time this same principle of self-interest permits an individual not to devote his resources to the
making of something that is scarce, if he is convinced that he should do
something else that would be still more useful. He is free to compose

34

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

poetry or paint pictures, or preach to the souls of men if he thinks that
the world will be better for his doing so. But he must not ask the State
to force those who do not like his poetry, who find no beauty in his pictures or who seek salvation through other doctrines, to support him. If
he really wants to provide his fellows with something which he thinks
they need, he must be prepared to pay for his conviction in material
privations. There is nothing moral in providing the public with what it
does not want if one also insists upon being rewarded as well as if one
devoted oneself to providing them with what they do want. In the
centrally directed mercantilist society of his time, Adam Smith argued,
there is less opportunity for men to voluntarily serve the long-run spiritual interests of their fellows than there is in one based on freedom of
choice. For in a centrally directed society the planning authority simply
cannot permit individuals to do what they choose; hence it cannot permit
them to do what they think is right.

Regardless of whether one accepts or rejects this concept of selfinterest, it is important to realize that all thoughtful defenders of
private enterprise accept the idea of self-interest as an essential
feature of the system because of their conviction that it serves
highly moral ends.
Questions:
1. Define "the private enterprise system"; indicate the criteria the
authors use for determining whether an actual economic system is
predominantly private.
2. "The private enterprise system came into existence as a result of the
publication of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations" Discuss.
3. List the major problems that any economic system must solve and
indicate the role of the following in the solving of these problems in
a private enterprise system: (a) consumer sovereignty; (b) profits
and losses; (c) prices; (d) competition; and (e) self-interest.
4. Explain by example the difference between the economist's conception of saving and that of the man on the street.
5. Go back to your "goals for a good economic system" and indicate
which of them appear to be attainable under private enterprise and
which unattainable. Add any further goals suggested by this chapter.
6. "Anyone with strong ethical convictions must reject a form of economic organization based on self-interest and competition. The good
society must be founded on love of one's fellow man and cooperation." Indicate how a believer in the "rightness" of a competitive
enterprise system might answer this statement.

Specialization

W E HAVE noted before that the
main goal of economic activity is the satisfaction of human wants.
Most of the goods and services that we use to satisfy our wants
come to us through a complex chain of production. To illustrate,
let us construct a history of the pair of shoes you are now wearing.

THE DIVISION OF LABOR
The hide may have come from a steer fattened on the pampas
of the Argentine and slaughtered in a plant located in Buenos
Aires. The machinery and the equipment of the slaughterhouse
may have been made in England and transported to the Argentine
in a Greek tramp steamer built in Norway. Perhaps the hide was
shipped to Boston in a British ship, then sold through wholesale
channels to a plant in Nashville, Tennessee, and transported there
in a freight car which moved over three railroad systems. In Nashville it was cut up and worked on by many men, using a number
of complex machines. These machines had been produced with
the use of still other machines, which in turn had been produced
by other men using other materials, tools, and machines. Out of all
this emerged a finished pair of shoes. The shoes moved from the
factory through wholesale and retail channels into your hands
against the payment of a ten dollar bill. When you turned over that
bill to the retailer, a long cycle of production was completed. The
final payment was made for all the work performed in many lands
and over many years.
Division of labor involves cooperation. In a modern economy,
the making of even a pair of shoes involves a near miracle of cooperation and coordination. It is quite impossible to say how many
persons, some living, some long dead, were involved in one way
35

36

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

or another. The tasks which these people performed were many
and varied. If we could identify every one of the tasks and watch
the men and women at work, we would be struck by the fact that
most of the tasks were quite simple. Also, we would find that the
workers and employers were largely unaware of the complexity of
their joint efforts. How then was this amazing feat of coordination
accomplished? How was the cooperation of each person obtained?
The answers to these questions lie in the details of what we have
called "economic organization." Much of the rest of this book is
devoted to showing how these questions are answered under a free
enterprise type of economic organization. At this time it is important only to note that all forms of economic organization involve
cooperation and coordination. The main differences between economies based on free enterprise and those based on detailed production planning relate to the methods of reaching decisions and
bringing about the necessary cooperation.
Division of labor defined. The term, "the division of labor," describes a method of production in which a complex process is
broken down into a number of small tasks. When one (or a related
group) of these tasks tends to be performed in one place, we refer
to this as territorial specialization or the territorial division of labor.
During the 19th century the territorial division of labor was considerably expanded. Countries and regions within countries specialized. Paris became noted for women's fashions, Lancashire
in England for its textiles, Holland for its cheeses and tulips, Denmark for its bacon and eggs, and Brazil for its coffee. Ceylon is
now noted for its tea; Burma for its rubber plantations. In this
country Detroit is associated with automobiles, Hollywood with
motion pictures, the South with cotton and tobacco, etc.
Much of the world's territorial specialization rests on climatic
conditions or upon the distribution of natural resources. However,
an important part of economic activity is not tied to given locations by unalterable factors such as rainfall and coal deposits. It
is this locationally freer part that gives rise to some of the most
interesting and difficult issues in the field of social control. Why is
Switzerland such a great watch-making country? If competition
from Swiss-made watches is hurting the American watch-making
industry, should the American firms be protected by tariffs on Swiss
watches? Why did the American textile industry start in New England? Why is it migrating southward? If this shift causes unemployment and individual hardships in New England, should the Federal
Government intervene to stop or at least slow down the movement?

SPECIALIZATION

37

In other words, should goods be permitted to move freely from
one region of a country to another and from one country to another?
It should be clear that the answer to this very important question
must be sought in the advantages and disadvantages of territorial
specialization.
In the remainder of this chapter we shall discuss (1) the conditions that promote the division of labor, (2) the economic advantages of specialization, and (3) some of the more important social
consequences and complications of specialization.
CONDITIONS FAVORING SPECIALIZATION

An elaborate division of labor depends upon the presence of a
number of favorable conditions of which the following deserve
attention: (1) the use of money; (2) the size of the market; (3)
exact standards for weighing and measuring; (4) the protection of
the claims of specialists; (5) surpluses to carry the load of waiting
involved in modern production; and finally (6) a favorable social
environment.
Money and specialization. Specialization goes back to the very
beginnings of recorded history. Even as late as the Middle Ages
we can find examples of the earlier, simpler forms of division of
labor. There was the hunter, the farmer, the smith, the carpenter,
the weaver, the fuller, the cartwright, and a host of other craft
specialists. Old family names carry the record of this simple division of labor. These specialists worked for the most part with
hand tools and were almost entirely dependent for power on their
own muscles and upon the strength of domesticated animals. Markets were small and local, and the specialist could (and, to some
extent, did) exchange his products directly with other specialists,
without the need of a medium of exchange. We speak of such an
economy as a barter economy. The process was necessarily cumbersome, time-consuming, and unsatisfactory. It was largely a matter
of luck if one specialist found others who had what he wanted, in
the quantities he wanted, and were prepared to take in exchange
what he had to offer. Exchange was immensely promoted, therefore, whenever a people agreed upon some one commodity as a
medium of exchange. Thus the social invention of money encouraged the division of labor, and every improvement in the quality and reliability of money made possible further specialization.
The role of the market. Adam Smith long ago pointed out that
"the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market/' The
market is a four-dimensional concept, involving area, number of

38

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

buyers, their purchasing power, and time. If, for example, a shoemaker could sell only 20 pairs of shoes per month, and if he could
make one pair of shoes a day, there would be no advantage in his
breaking the job down into many small parts and employing a
helper for each specialized task. If, however, he could sell 75 pairs
of shoes per month, it might be profitable for him to hire helpers
to perform the less difficult tasks while he devoted himself to those
requiring special skills.
But what would make it possible for him to sell 75 rather than
20 pairs of shoes per month? One factor might be a breakdown
of barriers to trade between localities. In the Middle Ages, it was
exceedingly difficult for a shoemaker in one town to sell his shoes
even in the neighboring town. Special tolls and other forms of discrimination confronted the "outsider" in every market. With the
rise of nationalist-minded rulers, many of these barriers to trade
within each country were reduced (at the same time, barriers to
trade between countries were increased).
Another factor might be a lowering of the cost of transporting
goods from one place to another. Improved roads and canals, better transport vehicles, better protection against robbers, improved
ocean transport—any number of such changes—could widen the
market for this man's shoes. A market is said to be widened when
some change permits a producer to extend his sales over a wider
geographical area.
Or the increased sales might have come through an increase in
the population in his market area or through a general improvement in the economic well-being of the people in the area. Either
of these changes would deepen the market for his shoes. A market
is said to be deepened when buyers within a given area are able
and willing to buy more than before even in the absence of a price
reduction.
These same market factors operate today to determine the extent
to which it is profitable to carry specialization. The American market itself is wide and deep enough to permit American producers
in many lines to carry specialization further than the producers in
any other country of the world. All of us have profited from this
specialization through the lowered costs of the things we buy.
The role of standards. Another condition necessary to the full
development of the division of labor is the establishment of exact
standards of length, area, volume, weight, temperature, pressure,
etc. Until quite recently rather primitive and inexact standards

SPECIALIZATION

39

sufficed. Each country had its own measures. In England, for example, the "foot" was the length of the king's foot.
As trade between people in different areas developed, and as tool
making and science grew in importance, it became imperative that
men should agree regarding the exact meaning of the weights and
the measures involved in their transactions. Governments have
played a large and constructive role in the establishment of standards. For example, all of our states define the "yard" as being
0.9144 as long as a platinum-iridium bar which was presented to
our Bureau of Standards by the International Bureau of Weights
and Measures. The American bar is identical in length with a
similar bar located in France when that bar is supported in a definitely specified manner, at the temperature of melting ice, and at
standard atmospheric pressure.
Despite the great advantages to be had from the general adoption of international standards, most countries keep customary
standards and content themselves with expressing them in terms of
the international standards. This diversity is inconvenient enough
when the national units have different names; it is downright confusing when two areas use the same term but define it differently.
The British quart is larger than the American quart; the Georgia
bushel is not the same as the New York bushel. These differences
serve no useful purpose. International trade would be facilitated
and we would all be better off if national governments could agree
upon a single set of physical standards.
The protection of claims. As the products of specialists move
from hand to hand and from place to place and are combined with
the products of other specialists, claims must be kept distinct, identifiable, and enforceable at every instant of time. Contracts must
be made and must be legally binding. Without the legal protection
of claims, the division of labor could never have advanced much
beyond the narrow limits set by the shortcomings of barter. Our
modern economy with its minute division of labor is essentially a
credit economy. It rests on a vast network of reciprocal obligations
and it can persist only as long as men take it for granted that these
obligations will be observed. Thus the protection of claims through
dependable commercial law is an essential prerequisite to the
development and to the maintenance of the division of labor.
The importance of surpluses. The division of labor increases output per worker and hence makes it easier for men to develop surpluses over and above their immediate and customary needs. These
surpluses in turn favor the further elaboration of the division of

40

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

labor. Robinson Crusoe could stop to fashion a bow and arrows
because he did not need the last ounce of his energy to gather food.
Once a surplus has been created the further development of the
division of labor becomes progressively easier. Men can be supported from this surplus while they devote their time, energy, and
ingenuity to devising new and better ways of doing things. Others
can be fed, clothed, and housed while they add to our supply of
capital goods and durable consumer goods. Still others can cater to
our desire for education. Our complex, enormously productive and
highly specialized economy depends upon the surpluses accumulated by past generations. These surpluses are represented by our
vast stocks of tools and machines, our factories, office buildings, our
roads and railroads, our schoolhouses and homes and, last but not
least, "the whole mass of commonplace and of specialized knowledge which enables people to work in disciplined harmony for each
other and to make use of each other's products."x A surprisingly
large part of our annual effort is required merely to maintain this
vast stock of material and immaterial wealth. If we neglect this
maintenance, we can increase for a short time the supply of consumer goods and thereby increase our material well-being. A society, like an individual, can consume its capital. However, this
surplus is, in a very real sense, a trust to be handed on to our children. It can and it always will be drawn upon to tide a nation
over a great emergency; it is dangerous to draw upon it in ordinary
times simply that we may live beyond our means.
The role of environment. Division of labor can exist under almost
any type of social environment. However, for specialization to develop to its most advanced forms (see the discussion of mass production below) and for it to be supplemented by technological
progress, special environmental factors seem to be required. One
of the most important of these factors is a willingness of men to
accept and adjust to change. In Western Europe during the feudal
era, custom and tradition had a strong hold on the minds of men.
The same is true today in many of the so-called "underdeveloped"
countries. In such an environment, both specialization and technology are likely to be frozen at very simple levels.
Another environmental factor of great importance is the philosophy of life which motivates the men and women in a given society.
If the goal of life in this world is largely to prepare for life in the
next world, the best minds and talents will not be devoted to im1

Wesley C. Mitchell, Business Cycles, The Problem and Its Setting, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., New York: 1927, p. 93.

SPECIALIZATION

41

proving the techniques of production or the level of specialization.
It is not for the economist to say that such "other-worldliness" is a
better or worse approach to life than the "this-worldliness" which
seems to characterize modern Western societies. He is, however,
in a position to say that "other-worldliness" is not conducive to economic progress. The economist can say also that these philosophical differences must be taken into account when plans are made
to improve the well-being of the peoples in the underdeveloped
countries. We shall come back to this point in our discussion of
American foreign economic policy.
THE ADVANTAGES OF SPECIALIZATION

Our discussion so far has taken for granted the economic gains
of specialization. Now we must ask just how and why specialization
leads to lower costs of production. There are a number of reasons
for the technical superiority of specialized over nonspecialized
operations.
More effective use of human resources. In the first place specialization promotes a more effective use of men differing widely in
natural aptitudes than does nonspecialization. The making of a
pair of shoes, for example, involves operations of varying degrees
of complexity. There may be a dozen men capable of performing
the simplest operations for every one able to perform the most
complicated task. It would obviously be advantageous, therefore,
to relieve the very skilled worker from the routine and easily mastered phases of the job and put him exclusively to the task which
he alone is capable of doing easily and well. The result is more
and better shoes than would otherwise be possible. If, as is apparently the case, skills and aptitudes are very unevenly distributed
in a population, much is to be gained by breaking down a complicated job into simple repetitive tasks and then assigning to each
man the task that appears to be most suited to his abilities and his
temperament.
Increased efficiency. A subsidiary advantage follows from this
first advantage. Not only is it possible to assign an individual to
a task suited to his abilities, but it is further inevitable that the
constant repetition of the task will increase, up to a certain point
at least, the ease, precision, and speed with which it is performed.
Practice makes perfect. Workers with various skills become more
efficient.
Saving time. A third advantage of the division of labor is the
saving of time. The master shoemaker who has to assemble his

42

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

own tools and materials, to shift from one tool to another as the
shoe takes shape, and to stop to serve his customers obviously
wastes a lot of time in the absolute sense, as well as in the relative
sense of devoting a large part of his time to doing things which
less skilled workers could do equally well. As the scale of production increases, the production process can be planned. A boy can
be hired to keep the shoemaker supplied with the needed materials
and to clear away the waste and collect the finished shoes. A little
thought and a visit to a modern shop will make it clear how large
a role this saving of time plays in modern production.
Machines and power. A fourth advantage of the division of labor
is that it paves the way for the replacement of the hand tool and
the muscular power of the worker and his domesticated animals by
precision machines and mechanical power.
As the division of labor became more complex, men of ingenious
mind and acute powers of observation noticed that certain productive processes involved identical motions repeated over and over
again. They also noticed that the excellence of the product was
frequently reduced by the inability of the worker to repeat these
motions with complete fidelity. Why not attach an iron arm to a
wheel and the tool to the iron arm and let the man turn the wheel?
In this way he could secure that identity of motion that he was
unable to maintain when he himself grasped the tool and attempted
the impossible task of forcing his arm to repeat the motion.
Once this idea was grasped, the development of the division of
labor went ahead rapidly. Heretofore, the breakdown of jobs appears to have been on the basis of differences in the skills required.
Now it was advantageous to make a further breakdown with a
view to separating out a process involving the repetition of some
simple movement and to developing a machine to take it over. Invention, itself, now became a recognized form of specialization.
Adam Smith noted this new development in his well-known discussion of the advantages of the division of labor.
All the improvements in machinery, however, have by no means been
the inventions of those who had occasion to use the machines. Many of
the improvements have been made by the ingenuity of the makers of the
machines, when to make them became the business of a peculiar trade;
and some by that of those who are called philosophers or men of speculation, whose trade it is not to do anything, but to observe everything; and
who, upon that account, are often capable of combining together the
powers of the most distant and dissimilar objects. In the progress of society, philosophy or speculation becomes, like every other employment,

SPECIALIZATION

43

the principal or sole trade and occupation of a particular class of citizens.
Like every other employment, too, it is subdivided into a great number
of different branches, each of which affords occupation to a peculiar tribe
or class of philosophers; and this subdivision of employment in philosophy, as well as in every other business, improves dexterity and saves
time. Each individual becomes more expert in his own peculiar branch,
more work is done upon the whole, and the quantity of science is considerably increased by it.2
Mass production. A further advantage of specialization is that
it makes possible the economies of what has come to be known as
mass production. We have mass production when a producer turns
out very large numbers of items identical in every respect. This is
technically possible only through the use of power-driven machines
and specially designed tools. It is economically possible only when
there exists a market broad enough and deep enough to absorb
a very large output. In many lines of production the American
market is the only one today broad enough and deep enough to
warrant the use of the best equipment that engineers can design
with their present knowledge. That is the principal reason why
mass production has been carried further here than anywhere else
and why the American level of living is the highest in the world.
In parts of the world where broad markets do not exist, the economies of mass production cannot be had even if the people were
to be given the funds and the know-how to acquire and operate
modern specialized equipment.
SOME SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIALIZATION
It would require many books and the wisdom of many men to
identify and assay all the consequences that have flowed from the
specialization of the last 200 years. The consequences cited in
the preceding section are regarded by most people as desirable, as
evidences of progress. More people enjoy more goods and services
and a far wider array of goods and services than ever before. In
the countries where specialization has gone the farthest the work
day is relatively short, and much of the really exhausting physical
labor has been taken over by power-driven machinery. In these
countries famine is almost unknown, and life expectancy is two to
three times as high as it was a couple of centuries ago or as it is
2
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
with an Introductory Essay and Notes by J. Shield Nicholson, T. Nelson and Sons,
London: 1895, p. 5.

44

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

in countries that have not yet developed the complex division of
labor.
All these things are surely good. Yet there have been losses as
well. In this section we shall examine a number of consequences in
which gains and losses are blended. We shall find that specialization is not an unmixed blessing, that it brings with it various problems and complications which must be handled properly if the net
result of specialization is to be beneficial to mankind.
Growth of population. The first and most obvious result of the
shift from the simple division of labor to the complex specialization
characteristic of the modern world has been the growth in population. Our knowledge of the population of Western Europe prior to
1800 is scant and uncertain. There was probably a decline in the
dark centuries between the fall of the Roman Empire and the emergence of the feudal system and a slow but pretty steady growth
from around 1650 on until the powerful new technologies of the
Industrial Revolution made themselves felt. Thereafter the growth
was phenomenal. By 1929 the peoples of Europe and their descendants overseas had risen from about 100 to about 642 millions. During the same period the population in the area that is now the
United States increased from about 52,000 to about 130 million;
non-European stocks increased by about threefold. The population
of the world today is in the neighborhood of 2,350 millions. Population experts predict that it may pass the three billion mark in the
next fifty years.3 Unless the new methods of production can bring
a fuller and more satisfying life to these increasing numbers there
is no clear reason why we should regard the new methods as a boon
to mankind.
Growing interdependence. Another far-reaching consequence of
the complex division of labor has been the growth of interdependence of man on man and region upon region. Any division of labor,
of course, makes man dependent, to some extent, upon his neighbor. Only a Robinson Crusoe can be completely independent. But
until very recently this dependency was among persons who lived,
as it were, face to face with one another. Throughout the Middle
Ages the overwhelming majority of the people lived in small rural
settlements grouped around the medieval manor. Virtually their
every want was satisfied by their own production or by the production of their immediate neighbors. Only the lord of the manor, his
3

The population of the world was probably less than 900 million in 1750. This
figure and that for today are taken from M. K. Bennett, "Population and Food Supply: The Current Scare," The Scientific Monthly, January, 1949, p. 18.

SPECIALIZATION

45

family, a few of his more important retainers, the higher ranks of
the clergy, and the rich burghers in the larger towns consumed
products made in far places. The simple folk in the towns and on
the manor lived out their lives within a radius of a few miles of
their birthplaces and were fed, clothed, and housed with materials
produced within the same narrow confines. Feudal society as a
whole was dependent, but the dependency was primarily upon impersonal and, as far as they were concerned, uncontrollable forces
of nature. Given a cycle of favorable growing weather, the people
and their flocks grew fat and multiplied. Given a cycle of bad
weather, the people and their flocks grew thin. Hunger and disease
cut numbers down to what the local farming lands could support.
And if these two grim agencies of population control failed to reestablish the balance between production and reproduction, wars
between rival manors could be counted upon to complete the task.
Subject to these important limitations the great majority of the people of medieval Europe lived out their lives in communities possessing a high degree of self-sufficiency and independence.
The new specialization changed all this. Today, in countries with
an advanced capitalistic structure the majority of the people live in
towns and cities of considerable size, perform simple, repetitive
tasks, and are dependent for their daily bread upon the uninterrupted interchange of goods and services with peoples scattered
across the world. There is not a city in the United States in which
the people could be fed adequately if the complex division of labor
broke down. In the same way every highly industrialized country
faces disaster if the international exchange of goods and services is
interrupted (as Great Britain has discovered in two world wars).
It is not surprising then that modern man looks at this complex
division of labor and territorial specialization with mixed feelings.
Some of the most important problems of today arise out of men's
efforts to escape from this interdependence upon which their very
existences have come to depend.
Belief in progress. The growth in population and the slow but
steady rise in the material well-being of the broad masses in the
countries of the West created a popular belief in the inevitability
of progress. For the first time in recorded history man appeared to
have at his disposal a technique of production so powerful that it
could wipe poverty from the face of the earth and provide, as a
matter of right, a decent living to all.
The new and optimistic attitude toward life engendered by this
faith in progress has had profound social, psychological, and polit-

46

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

ical effects. In the United States it has been responsible for much
of our social legislation and for our popular confidence in public
education. The improvement factor, providing for an automatic
annual increase in wages, which was first introduced into a contract
entered into by the General Motors Corporation with the United
Automobile Workers, CIO, reflects this faith in the inevitability of
progress.
On balance the faith appears to have promoted tolerance and to
have released energies wherever people were able and willing to
welcome and adjust to change; as a consequence, progress has
justified and strengthened this faith in these areas. Where this type
of environment does not exist, or where it has been seriously weakened by popular demands for personal security, the belief in progress leads to disappointed hopes and to revolutionary movements
which end in tyranny rather than progress.
Joy in work. A substantial fraction of each man's life is devoted
not to spending but to earning income. His happiness, then, depends not just on what he gets but also on what he does. There are
many who argue that specialization has taken most of the joy out
of work. These people point to the greater monotony of highly
repetitive tasks, to the nervous fatigue that may be involved in fitting one's pace to that of the machine, to the sense of futility that
may be involved in doing one minute and apparently insignificant
task hour after hour and day after day. John Ruskin was sure that
the life of the medieval craftsman was more satisfying than that of
the mechanic of his day.4 Many poets, artists, and professional people are prone to agree with Ruskin. But all that they are saying is
that they do not think that they would be happy tending a machine.
The steady decline of the hand crafts appears to prove that most
men prefer the incomes and satisfactions of the new work methods
to the incomes and satisfactions of the old ones. Also modem managers seem to be increasingly aware of the need of each man to
derive satisfaction from his job. The techniques of modem personnel management represent, in part, an attack on this problem.
The business cycle. As far back as the record goes there have
been good and bad times, but there is considerable evidence that
these changes only assume the roughly rhythmic character that has
given rise to the expression "the business cycle" in societies in which
4

See his The Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849); Unto This Last (1862); Munera Pulveris (1862); The Crown of Wild Olive (1868); and Fors Clavigera (187178); and above all, Time and Tide (1867). A sympathetic appreciation of Ruskin,
the social reformer, will be found in J. A. Hobson's John Ruskin, Social Reformer,
D. Estes & Co., Boston: 1895.

SPECIALIZATION

47

most of the "economic activities have taken on the form of making
and spending money."5 This is simply a way of saying that the
phenomenon of the business cycle is presumably connected with
the way in which a complex money economy operates. If this is
true, the great gains in productivity which have resulted from the
use of money and the elaborate division of labor which money
makes possible may be offset, in part, by the periodic losses which
result from mass unemployment. We shall be concerned with the
business cyle in later chapters and with the possibility of controlling
it without destroying the productivity of a money economy and
without assigning to the State powers of direction so great as to
threaten our personal and political liberties.
Specialization, as it has developed over the last 200 years, has
created societies quite different from those of any preceding age.
Probably the majority of the adults of the generation that ended in
1914, in the United States at least, believed that mankind stood on
the threshold of an era of abundance, freedom, and peace. Two
world wars and the collapse of popular governments in many parts
of the world have shaken this comfortable optimism. We know that
what has been accomplished in the past is nothing to what lies
within our grasp, if we use wisely the enormous new forces that
are at our disposal as we enter the atomic age. But we also know
that progress is not inevitable.

Questions:
1. Discuss critically the charge that the private enterprise system is
ethically wrong because it is based on competition instead of cooperation.
2. Identify the conditions favoring the development of the division of
labor, and, in the light of your general knowledge, indicate with
supporting reasons which of the following measures tend to promote
and which to restrict the division of labor: (a) Tariffs at national
frontiers; (b) advertising; (c) the maintenance of law and order and
the enforcement of contracts; (d) agricultural subsidies; (e) research
in the pure sciences; (f) growth of population; (g) a highly progressive income tax; (h) "otherworldliness"; (i) rigid folkways.
3. Identify the principal advantages of the division of labor and list the
reasons for its relatively high development in the United States.
5

Mitchell, op. cit, p. 63.

48

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

4. Define specialization; identify some of the social consequences of
specialization; and indicate with supporting reasons those which you
regard as desirable and those which you regard as undesirable.
5. Give examples of (a) developments which tend to widen and (b) developments which tend to deepen the market, and explain the significance of Adam Smith's statement that "the division of labor is
limited by the extent of the market."

Forms of Business Organization

AN A private enterprise economy
the firm is the agency that executes the orders of the consumers. It
is a voluntary association of resource owners organized for the purpose of making profits by producing for sale economic goods and
services. The firm sells to individuals, to other firms, and to the
State and its subdivisions.
In addition to business firms there are many voluntary, nonprofitmaking associations catering to human needs. These are churches,
lodges, private schools, and philanthropic corporations.
The State too is an association that uses resources and provides
goods and services. Membership is compulsory, and the managers
do not have to keep the organization "out of the red," as do the
managers of private business firms. Hence there is no easy method
of determining the scope of its activities. One of the tasks of economics and political science is to determine the appropriate roles
of the State and of private profit-making firms in societies that desire to maintain the institutions of private property and private
enterprise.
Our concern in this chapter is with private, profit-seeking firms.
Such firms vary from the one-man shop and the small family farm
to the huge enterprise with dozens of separate plants and tens to
hundreds of thousands of paid workers. The term plant refers to
the basic production unit. With a few exceptions, such as railroads,
a plant is located in a single community. A firm, on the other hand,
may consist of one plant or many. Altogether there are over three
million nonagricultural firms in the United States and close to six
million agricultural firms, i.e., farms, most of which are very small.
Smallness is also characteristic of the firms outside of agriculture.
49

50

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

91.3 percent of the 3,316,700 nonagricultural firms doing business in
the United States in 1939 had less than 8 employees, while less than one
percent hired more than 99. Only three-tenths of one percent had more
than 249 employees on their payrolls. But these large firms, while few in
number, are responsible for the bulk of nonfarm employment. In round
numbers 16 million, or 57 percent, of the gainfully employed not
engaged in agriculture were working for firms employing 100 or more
workers. The 4,900 largest firms, those with 500 or more workers, represented one-fifth of one percent of all nonagricultural firms and
gave employment to 40 percent of the nonagricultural labor force. The
90 odd percent of small firms employed less than one-quarter of the working population (23.7%). More than a million and one-half had no hired
workers. These were the self-employed and the members of their families. The proportions will not be very different today.1
It is customary to group firms into a few major classifications according to some common characteristic, such as materials handled
or products made. United States Government statistics recognize
seven large groupings: the extractive industries; contract construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, and public
utilities; wholesale trade; service industries; finance, insurance, and
real estate—with many subgroups under each. The term "industry"
is used interchangeably to cover one of the major classifications or
one of the narrower subgroups. The term lacks precision and hence
lends itself to misuse. It is easy, for example, to prove that an industry is monopolistic by simply narrowing the definition of the
industry to cover a single, highly specialized product.

THE LEGAL CONCEPT OF THE FIRM
Any form of voluntary association requires either tacit or formal
public approval. In the United States business firms are organized
under four legal forms: the individual proprietorship; the partnership; the corporation; and the cooperative.
The individual proprietorship. In the individual proprietorship a
single individual is legally responsible for the conduct of the business, is entitled to all the profits, and is obliged to meet all the losses
to the full extent of his ability. The business may be large or small
and it may be conducted in a single plant or in many plants; the
proprietor may supply all the labor and capital himself as well as
the management, as in the case of a one-man repair shop; or he may
hire a large number of workers, including a salaried manager, and
1
From A. D. H. Kaplan's Small Business: Its Place and Problems, McGraw-Hill,
New York: 1948, p. 25.

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORCxANIZATION

51

borrow a substantial part of his operating capital. The typical and
important feature of this form of organization is that all those who
cooperate with the proprietor do so on terms agreed upon in advance. The workers receive explicit wages; the suppliers of capital
receive explicit interest. If the proprietor does not own the land
used in his operations, he pays explicit rent. In brief, the proprietor
pays all the expenses of production and gains legal title to all the
moneys derived from the sale of the goods and services produced
by the firm. If receipts exceed explicit expenses, the excess in the
eyes of the law belongs to him. Often this excess may be less than
he could earn by working for someone else. A proprietor gets no
wages; he earns no interest on his own capital invested in the firm.
If expenses exceed receipts, he must nonetheless meet all his explicit
expenses on pain of bankruptcy. His home, the savings which he
had not intended to commit to the business, everything is involved.
The advantages of the individual proprietorship are fairly obvious: unity of command, the ability to make quick decisions, the
complete dedication of the owner to the success of the venture.
The great disadvantage of this form of business organization is that
it does not lend itself to the bringing together of the capital needed
to finance really large enterprises. The resources and the credit of
even a very wealthy man would not be adequate for the requirements of even a medium-sized enterprise in the United States today. Also the unlimited liability that the individual proprietor must
assume tends to deter wealthy men from engaging in an enterprise
involving unlimited liability. To do so would jeopardize all of their
resources and not merely those directly committed to the business.
Numerically, individual proprietorships outnumber the other
three categories, but in terms of work done they play a less important role in the American economy. The family farm, the tiny
grocery store, the garage, the filling station, and the one-man
lawyer's or doctor's office are examples of the single proprietorship.
The partnership. The partnership is nothing more than an enlargement of the single proprietorship. Each partner may commit
the firm and in turn is legally liable for the acts of the other partners, as well as for those of subordinates. This unlimited liability
gives the partnership excellent credit standing, but imposes a degree of risk that has made this form of organization, like the individual proprietorship, unsuitable to most enterprises requiring
large amounts of capital. Another disadvantage of the partnership
grows out of the necessity of dissolving the firm and reorganizing
it every time a change occurs in the membership or in the relative

52

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

investments of the several partners. This right of withdrawal places
a minority partner in a strong bargaining position in the case of
any proposal to which he strongly objects. It thus complicates
prompt decision making. The partnership form of organization is
most practical when the number of partners involved is small and
the relationship between the partners intimate.
The corporation. The corporate form of organization developed
slowly. In the 16th and 17th centuries a group of individuals would
buy "shares" in a single adventure—a trading expedition to India or
the Hudson Bay Region, for example. They participated in the
profits or losses of the expedition according to the relative value of
their shares. The Company of Adventurers disbanded after the completion of each project. The problems of continuity and authority
had not been solved. The "regulated" companies which came next
partially met these needs. British "regulated" companies were given
royal charters and monopoly privileges in parts of the world under
British control. Such were the British East India Company, and the
Virginia, the London and the Plymouth Companies that established
and administered the first settlements in what is now the United
States. Each member of a "regulated" company was permitted to
provide his own capital, look out for it and withdraw it at his pleasure. Effective centralization of control had not been achieved, and
the problem of continuity had been only partially solved.
An important forward step occurred in 1662 when the British
East India Company was converted into a "joint stock" company.
Under the new arrangement the assets of the company were represented by transferable shares which could be bought and sold
without affecting the amount of capital at the disposal of the management. Those who provided the equity capital in this fashion
exercised their control through their right to choose the management. Each shareholder cast as many votes as he owned shares.
The problems of continuity and authority had been solved.
This continued to be the situation for the next 200 years. Then,
around 1850, the last step was taken with the introduction of the
principle of limited liability. Shareholders were relieved of legal
responsibility for all losses over and above what they had put in
when they bought the shares. In the United States owners of bank
stock are usually liable up to twice the par value of their shares.
Main features of the corporation. The corporation is thus a partnership with features added which (a) enable individuals to enter
or withdraw from the firm without interrupting its legal existence
—Continuity; (b) tighten lines of command so as to secure unity of

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

53

decision and of action in what would otherwise be an unwieldy organization—Authority; and (c) limit the losses of owners to their
equity investments in the organization—Limited Liability.
Equity investment or equity capital refers to resources that are
supplied by the owners of the enterprise. It is, par excellence, risk
capital put into the business with the expectation of getting a substantial return but with the realization that part or all may be lost,
and that in any event the affairs of the business may make it impossible or inexpedient for the management to make any return in
a particular year. The reward to equity capital does not form part
of the explicit expenses of the firm.
Nonequity capital refers to resources loaned to the firm for a consideration stated in advance. This consideration, interest, is an explicit expense which must be met punctually regardless of whether
the firm is or is not making a profit.
A corporation comes into existence by an act of government. It
receives a charter from the state. Originally these charters were
granted by special acts, but the danger of corruption and the popular favor which corporations enjoyed during most of the 19th century led to the passage of general laws governing the granting of
charters. Although our Federal Government has the power to grant
charters and occasionally does so, as in the case of our national
banks, most private American corporations hold theirs from the
individual states. With some exceptions, a charter granted by one
state entitles a corporation to do business in all the other states.
Corporation and partnership compared. In law the partnership
and the corporation are very different things. The real entities in a
partnership are the partners. It is they, and not the firm, who carry
on the business, who sue or are sued for breach of contract, and
who pay income taxes on the partnership earnings. Under federal
and state income tax laws the profits and the losses of partnerships
are treated as additions to or deductions from the personal incomes
of the partners. The partners pay personal income taxes at the rates
determined by their total taxable incomes whether or not the profits
are actually withdrawn from the business.
The corporation, on the other hand, is a "legal" person and as
such is entitled to many of the rights and immunities of "natural"
persons. It may not be deprived of its property except by due process of law. It is a person in the sense that one state may not discriminate against a corporation created by a sister state. The
corporation conducts business through its officers; it may sue and
be sued; it makes profits and experiences losses. A minority stock-

54

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

holder, unlike a minority partner, cannot block an action, provided
the action has the approval of those holding a majority of the stock,
by threatening to withdraw from the corporation. Nor can he force
the corporation to return his money. All he can do is offer his shares
for sale in the open market. The proceeds may or may not reimburse him for his original investment.
Under federal and state laws the profits of the corporation are
taxable as such. They form no part of the income of the stockholders until they are actually distributed, and then they are taxed
again. Since individuals and only individuals actually pay taxes,
the result is double taxation of that part of a person's income derived from making risk-capital available to firms organized as corporations. In the partnership, on the other hand, the income is
taxed to the partners in proportion to their interest, whether it is
distributed or not.
The cooperative. Cooperatives are private firms organized for
the primary purpose of serving their own members and not the
general public. They may either buy or sell for their members.
The Rochdale Pioneers. The operating rules that cooperatives
generally follow are very much the same as those worked out by the
small group of textile workers in Rochdale, England, in 1844, when
they arranged to buy a few staples for themselves. The Rochdale
Society of Equitable Pioneers, as they called themselves, agreed:
(1) that goods should be sold at prevailing prices; (2) that savings
(earnings) should be distributed according to purchases; (3) that
interest on capital should be restricted to a fixed rate; (4) that
membership should be open to all; (5) that each member should
have one vote and no more; (6) that full information—based on
proper audits and accounts—should be presented to the members;
(7) and that all business should be conducted on a cash basis. The
vast cooperative movement is generally regarded as the outgrowth
of the efforts of this little group of British workers to eliminate the
middleman and his profits and bring the consumer into direct contact with the producer.
Comparison with other forms of business organization. The cooperative resembles the corporation in a number of respects: (a)
the suppliers of the equity capital enjoy limited liability; (b) they
appoint the directors and the officers of the firm, who in general (c)
have the same powers as do the officers and directors of corporations; and finally (d) individuals may withdraw their equity capital
without endangering the continuity of the firm.

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

55

The differences, nonetheless, are striking:
(a) The suppliers of equity capital get only a limited dividend.
(b) Each stockholder has only one vote regardless of his investment. This is in marked contrast to the practice in the corporation.
(It conforms rather with the practice in modern mass democracies
in which each citizen has only one vote regardless of his wealth and
of how much he must contribute to the expenses of the State. In
this sense the cooperative is a more democratic form of business
organization than the corporation.)
(c) The real profits of the cooperative are paid out to the cooperators not in proportion to their equity interests in the firm but
in proportion to the business they do with it, either as buyers or
sellers. They are patronage dividends rather than risk-capital dividends. They may be paid to anyone doing business with the cooperative or reserved exclusively for those customers who are also
stockholders. In general, the bulk of the business of cooperatives is
done with their members, a fact which automatically limits the
scope of this form of business organization.
(d) The most striking difference, at least in the early days of
cooperatives, was in the spirit and purpose. The first cooperatives
were started by working class people (England) or by workers or
peasants (Continental Europe). They were a form of self-help.
The appeal was to group solidarity and to the spirit of service. In
part they were an expression of protest against profits and the profit
motive. As they have grown larger, the sentiment of solidarity has
undoubtedly weakened, but the tradition of service is still strong
and reflects itself in the relatively moderate salaries paid to top
executives.
The future of the cooperative movement should depend on how
well cooperatives serve as agents for carrying out the orders of consumers. If cooperatives receive no special favors, there can be no
valid objection by owners of profit-seeking businesses to the field
they manage to carve out for themselves. Many believe, however,
that the recent and rather rapid increase in the number of cooperatives and in the volume of business done by cooperatives in the
United States is due not so much to their efficiency as to the tax
advantages they receive from the Federal Government. Cooperatives pay no tax on moneys accumulated for expansion, whereas
the other forms of business organization pay a relatively heavy tax
on comparable accumulations. The alleged justification for this
differential treatment of the cooperative is that the money really
belongs to the patrons. If an attempt were made to tax these sur-

56

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

pluses, so runs the argument, the cooperatives would avoid the tax
by lowering their selling prices, if their patrons are buyers, or by
raising their buying prices, if their patrons are sellers. In brief, cooperators deny that the earnings of cooperatives are profits.
There could be no objection in principle to the tax treatment accorded cooperatives, if the other forms of business organization
received similar treatment. But the corporation, it will be recalled,
has to pay a heavy tax on any profits held back for expansion purposes, and, in addition, the stockholders have to pay a personal tax
on the distributed earnings (dividends) without any allowance for
the fact that the income from which the dividends are paid has
already been heavily taxed. Partnerships and individual proprietorships are not subject to this type of double taxation, but the earnings are subject to the personal income tax, regardless of whether or
not they are used for expansion.
The immunity of cooperatives from taxation on their net earnings
thus gives them a competitive advantage over corporations, partnerships, and individual proprietorships when it comes to raising new
capital for expansion purposes. It is true that the cooperatives can
avoid the tax by altering their buying or selling prices, but if they
do they then have to induce the cooperators to put up more
money to finance their expansion programs. It is always much
easier to get people to leave unpaid money claims in a firm than it is
to get them to put them back in once they have been paid out.
THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CORPORATION
The rapid growth of the corporate form of business organization
clearly proves that it is peculiarly appropriate to the requirements
of the complex division of labor. Presumably consumers are better
off because of the perfecting of this method of organizing an enterprise. Two further favorable consequences deserve consideration.
The field for private enterprise widened. The privileges of incorporation have greatly extended the field within which private enterprise can operate effectively. Stated negatively, it has reduced
man's dependence upon the state as a provider of goods and services. Many goods and services can be supplied efficiently only by
large firms, operating without a break over long periods of time. An
example is rail transportation. If private firms cannot accumulate
the funds or provide the continuity needed for such operations, then
the operations must be undertaken by government.
The corporate form of organization has provided the continuity
lacking in both the partnership and individual proprietorship. At

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

57

the same time, it has provided a convenient way for literally thousands of people to pool their resources to finance the operations of
a single firm. Even more important to the raising of capital, the
device of limited liability has reduced the risk to each person who
shares in the venture. The person of some means does not wish to
place his entire fortune in jeopardy each time he participates in a
venture.2 Yet this is what he must do if the venture is organized
under the individual proprietorship or partnership form. Through
its limited liability feature, the corporate form of organization has
made it possible for private firms to obtain the financing needed for
large-scale operations, and thus has widened the sphere for private
enterprise.
Capital formation promoted. In a private enterprise society, rising
levels of living depend upon voluntary saving, investing, and capital
formation and upon improvements in technology. All these actions
involve risks. The privilege of incorporation has reduced the repressive effects of risk by providing a wide variety of investment opportunities capable of appealing to individuals of very different
temperaments, ranging from extreme caution to recklessness. The
individual can so blend his investments as to secure the degree of
risk on his total wealth that fits his particular temperament. There
can be no doubt about the fact that the corporation has greatly
stimulated the volume of saving and hence increased the annual
rate of capital formation.
An understanding of the relationship of the corporation to the
rate of capital formation requires some discussion of the two principal ways in which corporations obtain outside funds for expansion
purposes: borrowing through the sale of bonds and notes; and obtaining equity investment through the issue of preferred and common stock.
Bonds and notes. Those supplying funds through the purchase of
bonds and notes have a claim to stipulated payments (interest) at
stipulated times (annually, semi-annually, or shorter intervals) regardless of whether the company is or is not making money.
Failure to pay the interest or the principal when due automatically
throws the company into technical bankruptcy. The bond and note
holders may or may not insist upon the liquidation of the company.
If they do, their claims on the physical and other assets of the enter2
The State in Elizabethan England solved this problem by granting trading companies monopoly rights to particular trade areas. This reduces the risk, but in a way
that would not be consistent with the operating requirements of an enterprise system. The device of limited liability would appear to be a more satisfactory way of
reducing risk.

58

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

prise stand ahead of those who supplied the equity or ownership
capital.
Preferred and common stock. A common characteristic of preferred and common stock is that the payment of dividends is discretionary. They may be "passed," i.e., omitted, without throwing
the company into technical bankruptcy. Preferred stock differs
from common stock, however, in a number of important respects.
First of all, the dividend on preferred stock is fixed in advance,
whereas there is no stipulated dividend to which the owner of common stock is entitled. If the preferred stock is cumulative, all
"passed" dividends must be paid before any dividends may be paid
on common stock. It follows that noncumulative preferred stock is
frequently much more risky than common stock. Another difference is that preferred shares are usually nonvoting. The real ownership of the corporation is in the hands of the holders of the
common stock. They are entitled to whatever remains, after all
other claims have been settled in full. The income from common
stock is thus residual. If nothing remains, the holders get nothing.
If a company is liquidated and its assets sold, again the holders of
the common stock receive only what is left after all other claims
have been satisfied in full.
Our purpose in making this brief excursion into the field of corporate finance is to show that the device of limited liability has
greatly widened the range of outlets for the savings of those who
are not prepared to go into business for themselves and has thus
contributed to the exceptionally rapid growth of the American economy. It would be an exaggeration to say that the corporation produces savers where otherwise there would be no savers, but it is
probably true that the corporation greatly stimulates private saving
and investment where the willingness to save already exists.
The device of limited liability is thus a social invention of great
significance, comparable in its importance, probably, to any single
invention in the field of natural science. And like discoveries in the
field of the natural sciences, this one is entirely amoral. It can be
put to good or to bad purposes.
Critics of the corporation allege that this form of business organization facilitates certain types of unethical business behavior, makes
it possible for businesses to grow too big, and promotes a concentration of power in private hands that threatens the vitality of our
democratic institutions.
Unethical business practices. The following practices are illustrative of the "unethical business practices" charge: excessive directors'

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

59

fees; excessive salaries and bonuses; stock market dealings by directors.
Excessive directors' fees. Some companies pay their directors as
much as $100 for each meeting attended. Directors could thus
make around $5,000 in fees if meetings were held weekly. For
many of them this would represent substantially more than the dividends from their holdings in the company. If the meetings were
held in a convenient place and were brief, the majority of the directors might be favorably disposed to unnecessarily frequent meetings. In a small company this drain on its revenues could reduce
considerably the rate of return on the common stock. What the
"inside" group of stockholders lost in dividends would be profitably
offset by their directors' fees. The common stockholders who were
not directors would be the victims of this sharp, yet entirely legal,
practice. It would be very difficult for them to prove before a court
of law that the Board of Directors was meeting too frequently.
Excessive salaries and bonuses. The payment of unnecessarily
high salaries and bonuses to the top management is said to be another way in which the legitimate interests of the rank and file of
the common stockholders can be hurt. Again the effect is likely to
be more serious in small- and intermediate-sized companies than in
very large ones, and it is in the latter that the very large awards
usually occur. The effect of overly generous salaries and bonuses
on the other claimants to the company's earnings is insignificant in
the case of giant corporations. In 1948 General Electric, for example, had over 180,000 wage and salaried employees, more than
250,000 common stock holders, and realized net sales of close to
$1,000,000,000. Suppose that it could be proved that in a corporation of that size ten men on the Board of Directors and five
officers, who were also members of the Board of Directors, were
getting $1,000,000 more than was necessary to secure their services.
This is a lot of money when divided among 15 men. Yet the effect
on the customers, stockholders, and the other employees is very
slight. Prices could be cut by only one-tenth of one percent if the
money were used exclusively for that purpose. Had it gone to the
wage and lower-salaried personnel, (say, five-sixths of the total
number employed) the average wage rate could not have been increased by as much as one-half cent per hour. (At 2000 hours per
employee—50 weeks at 40 hours per week—General Electric provided some 360 million man-hours of employment. An additional
$1,000,000 spread evenly over five-sixths of this payroll amounts to
one-third of a cent per hour, or less than 14 cents per week.) Nor

60

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

could $1,000,000 added to net profits mean much to the average
stockholder in a company with more than 250,000 stockholders.
Needless to say these practices are just as objectionable ethically
whether indulged in by large companies or by small ones. Popular
faith in private capitalism is inevitably weakened by acts of this
sort. They also complicate the task of maintaining good labor relations. Afirmthat pays extravagant top salaries finds it very difficult
to explain satisfactorily to the rank and file its inability to pay an
additional five cents an hour. It is probably true that a cut-back of
these salaries to the level of top clerks would not provide the means
to advance wages generally by as much as one cent an hour. This
answer does not satisfy the men, and the reason that it does not is
probably due more to resentment at what they consider the overpayment at the top than it is to dissatisfaction with the going rate.
This attitude complicates good labor-management relations and
confronts large corporations with a problem which cannot be solved
in a wholly satisfactory manner. Since really able leadership is extremely scarce, they must bid high for it, regardless of the reactions
of the rank and file of their employees.
Stock market speculation. The market value of a company's common stock depends much more on future earnings than upon the
value of the company's physical assets. The proceeds from the sale
of $100,000 worth of common stock may have been used to build a
factory, but the stock will not be worth much if the factory operates
at a loss. Stock values are exceedingly sensitive to coming events.
This fact gives members of management an excellent opportunity
to speculate in the stocks of their companies. They know a great
deal more than outsiders possibly can know about coming developments that will affect the company's earnings, favorably or unfavorably. Indeed through a generous or a parsimonious dividend policy,
or through the handling of obsolescence and depreciation expenses,
or through the issuing of optimistic or pessimistic forecasts, and in
many other ways, management can create misleading impressions
regarding the affairs of the company and then buy or sell with the
certainty of making a profit.
For obvious reasons this abuse is more likely to be found in large
companies than in small ones. State laws and more recently federal
laws have attempted to stop these practices. The situation is greatly
improved.
The list of alleged sharp practices could be greatly lengthened.
Many are already historical curiosities. This shows what can be
done when public opinion is really aroused and stays aroused.

FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION

61

Unethical practices there will always be because of defects in
human character. There is no reason to believe that the abolition
of the corporation or the nationalization of all large businesses
would reduce the opportunities for men to act dishonorably. It is
probable that unethical practices occur at least as frequently in
partnerships and individual proprietorships as in big corporations,
in nationalized enterprises as in privately owned enterprises.
The corporation and the problem of bigness. Much more serious
than the allegation that the privilege of incorporation has encouraged unethical business practices is the charge that it has made
possible the growth of firms that are too big, from the point of view
of efficiency; and dangerous because of the resulting concentration
of power in private hands.
The "power" charge touches upon issues in the realm of political
theory and political philosophy. The implication is that a workable
democracy can be preserved only by limiting the maximum size of
the firm, even if this means some sacrifice of material well-being.
We shall have more to say about this problem in later chapters.
The charge that the privilege of incorporation permits firms to
grow beyond their most economical size implies that competition
is not effective. We shall be concerned with this charge throughout
this book, but particularly in the next few chapters.
Questions:
1. Distinguish between a plant, a firm, and an industry and identify the
four legal forms used for carrying on business in the United States.
2. What legal forms do businesses usually assume when they require
relatively large amounts of capital? Why?
3. "The legal definition of profits exaggerates their importance in the
American national income." Indicate with supporting reasons your
agreement or disagreement. In the event that you agree, what practical consequences appear to follow from this exaggeration?
4. Identify significant differences between corporations and partnerships, on the one hand, and corporations and cooperatives, on the
other.
5. "The cooperative is a more democratic form of business organization
than the corporation." Indicate with supporting reasons your agreement or disagreement. In the event that you agree, argue for or
against the following proposition: "In a democratic society govern-

62

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
ment should actively promote the cooperative form of business organization."

6. Do our federal personal and corporate income taxes favor certain
forms of business organization more than others? If so, how? If you
conclude that they do, discuss the social and economic effects of the
differential treatment.
7. List the various ways in which a growing corporation can secure additional capital. Indicate in each case whether the new resources represent equity or nonequity capital. Explain the difference between
equity and nonequity capital.
8. "Noncumulative preferred stock is frequently much more risky than
common stock or bonds/' Identify these three types of securities and
defend or rebut the statement.
9. Identify a few abuses which are alleged to be due to the corporate
form of business organization.

PART TWO

The Market Economy
Under Pure Competition

Markets and Competition

AN CHAPTER 3 we described competition as the force that compels the owners of resources to do the
bidding of consumers. We turn now to a study of how this result
is obtained. In this study we shall examine the operation of the
entire signal system of an enterprise economy. We shall begin with
an examination of how the signal system works when all economic
activities are subjected to the discipline of competition. Later we
shall examine the changes in the operation of the economy that
arise when competitive pressures are weakened or eliminated.

THE MEANING OF COMPETITION
Competition is one of the most elusive, yet one of the most important, concepts in economics. Even the professional economist
has not been able to draw a sharp dividing line between competitive and noncompetitive behavior. It is not surprising then that
Congress and the courts have found it difficult to define and enforce
competitive conditions. Instead of black and white, these groups
have been confronted with various shades of gray. The very light
shades are clearly competitive; the very dark shades, clearly noncompetitive. But what of the shadings in between? Let us examine
the various ways in which the economist approaches this problem.
Markets. Before attempting a definition of competition we would
do well to recall the areas in economic life which the competitive
discipline is supposed to govern. In Chapter 3 we indicated that
competition is supposed to discipline men in all of their buying and
selling activities. In other words, it is to the markets in which goods
and services are bought and sold that we must turn our attention
when we study competition.
Each household and each firm operates in many markets, some65

66

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

times as buyer, sometimes as seller. Each household is a buying
unit when it is acquiring the food, clothing, and other goods and
services used in the household. It is a selling unit when it offers its
labor, its land or other natural resources, or its capital in the markets
for resources. Each firm is a buying unit when it is acquiring the
resources—the labor, land, capital, and managerial talent—which it
uses to produce goods and services. It is a selling unit when it
offers those goods and services for sale.
It is clear from this that each market is a two-sided affair, involving both buyers and sellers. It follows that for a market to be fully
competitive there must be competition on both sides. That is, buyers must compete with buyers and sellers with sellers. For example,
in a competitive labor market, workers will be competing for the
available jobs, and employers will be competing for the available
labor. It is a mistake to associate competition and its opposite,
monopoly, only with the behavior of business firms as sellers of
goods. It should be clear from our discussion that the behavior on
either side of a market, whether it be a market for goods or a
market for resources, can be classified as competitive or noncompetitive.
The results of competition. Still delaying a definition of competition, let us describe in general terms the results of competitive
action. Competition results in a situation in which each individual
can advance his own interest only by advancing the interests of
others. Under competition, the owners of a business firm can increase their own incomes only by giving the customers of the firm
more for their dollars. Under competition, workers can increase
their own incomes only by making bigger contributions to the satisfaction of consumer wants.
A definition of competition in terms of results. This leads the way
to a definition of competition in terms of results. Competition can be
said to exist in a given market whenever each buyer and each seller
in that market can improve his own economic position only by offering more for less. This is approximately the same definition as
the one used in Chapter 3. It might be called a performance test
for determining the existence of competition.
We shall make considerable use of this definition, but we must
recognize its limitations. The most serious limitation of this definition is that the results of market behavior are not easy to assess.
Reliable quantitative evidence showing that more is being offered
for less in any given situation is often difficult if not impossible to
obtain. For this reason, economists have usually defined competi-

MARKETS AND COMPETITION

67

tion not in terms of results but rather in terms of the organization
of the market which they believe is necessary to produce competitive results. This approach provides us with an organization test
for determining the existence of competition.
Definitions of competition in terms of market organization and

behavior. The average person has a rough perception of the
features of a market which tend to make it competitive or noncompetitive. He is uneasy whenever he finds that there is only one
source of something he wants to buy or one buyer for something he
wants to sell. He is uneasy whenever he lacks the technical knowledge to appraise what he is buying or selling. He is deeply disturbed to find that union rules or racial prejudice or some other
factor prevents him from moving into a particular kind of work. He
is suspicious of an arrangement under which the firms selling or
buying some product seem to be "working together," rather than
acting independently.
"Ideal" competition. These same factors are recognized in the
economist's classification of markets. We shall present first a very
demanding definition of competition, which we shall always refer
to hereafter as "ideal" competition. The requirements of "ideal"
competition are as follows:
(1) Each buying unit and each selling unit must be so small
relative to the total market that by its own activities it can have no
perceptible influence on the market price. This is illustrated in the
selling of wheat in the United States. If one American wheat
farmer were to hold his wheat off the market, what would happen
to the price of wheat? The answer: Nothing.
(2) Each unit of the goods or services sold must be a perfect
substitute for each other unit. This often requires more than that
the units be technically identical. Because of personal or locational
factors, a tube of a certain toothpaste sold in one store may not be
the same to a consumer as another tube of the same size and brand
sold in another store. Pure competition requires that there be no
preference for one seller or buyer over another on any basis other
than price.
(3) Each person involved in the market must have full knowledge of the alternatives confronting him.
(4) Each economic unit must be perfectly willing and able to
act on the basis of that knowledge, to move from one alternative
to another. This is often referred to as the requirement of mobility.
(5) Each economic unit must be acting independently. That is,

68

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

there must be no collusion among buyers against sellers or among
sellers against buyers.
The significance of "Ideal" competition. It is obvious that many
of the foregoing requirements can never be realized in economic
life. Of what use then is the definition? Admittedly it is of little
direct use in analyzing the actual behavior of our economy or as a
guide to public policy. However, it can contribute indirectly to
both these purposes. It provides the economist with an analytical
tool of considerable importance. It can be used as a bench-mark
against which to measure degrees and forms of deviations from
"ideal" conditions. Also it focuses attention on those aspects of
market organization and behavior which determine the way in
which a market operates. Those aspects are:
(1) the size of the economic unit relative to the market;
(2) the degree of homogeneity of the items being exchanged;
(3) the degree to which the participants are acting on the basis
of knowledge;
(4) the degree of mobility of the participants;
(5) the degree to which the participants are acting independently.
These characteristics are the ones used in classifying actual markets
in an enterprise economy. As we shall see, they are the keys to an
understanding of both competitive and noncompetitive behavior.
Pure competition. By relaxing the requirements of "ideal" competition, it is possible to construct one which is more realistic, more
directly useful, yet still of value as a tool of analysis. The modified
definition is as follows:
(1) Each buyer and each seller, acting alone, can exert so little
influence on the market price that it does not pay him to attempt to do so.
(2) Each unit of the good or service sold is so much like every
other unit that buyers and sellers will react to any but very
small differences in price.
(3) Enough buyers are possessed of sufficient knowledge of the alternatives to keep the sellers in line, and vice versa.
(4) Enough buyers are sufficiently willing and able to move from
one alternative to another to keep the sellers in line, and vice
versa.
(5) Just as before, each buyer and each seller acts independently.

MARKETS AND COMPETITION

69

The advantages of this over the first definition of competition will
be made clear as we proceed with our study of an enterprise system. In the future we shall distinguish between the two by calling
this one "pure competition," and both will be distinguished in a
later chapter from a still less exacting concept which will be referred to as "effective competition" or "workable competition."
NONCOMPETITIVE MARKETS

Whenever one or more of the preceding conditions is missing in
the market for a particular good, that market is technically a noncompetitive market. However, we shall find that certain market
forms which do not meet the technical requirements for pure competition are as efficient in yielding consumer satisfactions as those
which do—in some cases, even more efficient! It is in connection
with such market situations that we shall use the terms "effective
competition" and "workable competition." In view of the fact that
there are many types of markets, ranging from purely competitive
to completely monopolistic, it is evident that the terms "competitive" and "noncompetitive" are only roughly descriptive and are
not synonymous with "good" and "bad."
Deviations from purely competitive markets. The following deviations from technically competitive conditions will be discussed in
later chapters:
(1) Monopolistic competition describes a market situation in which
all of the requirements for pure competition are met but the
requirement of standardized product. The distinguishing characteristic of this type of market is product differentiation.
(2) Oligopoly describes a market situation in which each seller is
large enough relative to the market to be able to exert a significant influence on the market price. It is characterized by fewness of sellers and difficult entry into the market. Duopoly is
a form of oligopoly in which but two sellers operate in the
market.
(3) Monopoly is a situation in which only one supplier operates in
the market.
(4) Cartel is a market situation in which the sellers of the good or
service make joint rather than independent decisions about
price, output, and other policies. Collusion is a form of behavior that may be found in any of the market situations described above.

70

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

These four definitions were expressed in terms of the activities of
sellers. When buyers rather than sellers are involved, we shall follow established practice and use the designations monapsonistic
competition, oligopsony, duopsony and monopsony. Cartel is used
to describe collusive action on either side of the market.
ON THE MEANING OF MARKET
Up to this point we have deliberately refrained from defining the
term "market." It should be apparent that it too is an elusive concept. The economist uses the word "market" to describe the process
of exchange. It is, however, a process that always involves the following elements: a good or service (or some group of goods or
services), buyers, sellers, area (place), and time.
This far we can go without difficulty. But the definitions of competitive and noncompetitive conditions given before require that
we draw up specifications for each of the elements in the market
process for each market that we wish to examine. For example,
monopoly was said to be a situation in which only one supplier
operates in the market. Here is a town in which there is only one
supplier of new lumber and lumber products. Is this supplier a
monopolist? The answer depends on how the market is defined.
Market as area. If the commodity exchange is limited to new
lumber and lumber products and if the area is permitted to embrace
only the town itself, this supplier could be described as a monopolist. However, if the area specification were changed to recognize
the fact that suppliers in neighboring communities can also sell in
this town, this one dealer could not be described as a monopolist.
In the buying and selling of some good or service where transportation costs are relatively low (as in the buying and selling of insurance), the market area may actually embrace a whole country
or even a large part of the world. Even in the marketing of bulky
commodities like steel and steel products, suppliers from all over
the world may be in active competition with one another. This illustrates the importance (and difficulty) of drawing up area specifications for each market under study.
Market as commodity. Again, if the commodity specifications for
the market under discussion were changed to read, "building supplies," the new lumber dealer could be seen to face competition
from the sellers of other products that are directly competitive with
new lumber in many uses—the suppliers of used lumber, brick, concrete and concrete blocks, for example. Aluminum competes with
plywoods, veneer woods, and light steels; California oranges com-

MARKETS AND COMPETITION

71

pete with Florida grapefruit; milk is in competition with a dozen
other beverages; trucks vie with railroads, ships, and airplanes; new
cars are in competition with second-hand cars. This competition of
substitutes reduces the significance of the much publicized findings
regarding the high degree of concentration in various industries.
This kind of competition effectively limits the ability of many socalled "noncompetitive" firms to exploit the consumer.
Market as time. Finally any realistic description of market behavior in the United States today requires recognition of the role
that time plays in managerial decisions. A firm may have a complete monopoly in a market (in the area or the commodity sense)
and yet refuse to exploit its advantage because of its knowledge
that entry into the market is very easy and that the charging of a
high price will soon bring this about. It defends its monopoly position by acting as though it were operating in a purely competitive
market. Or it has a legalized monopoly—through a patent, for example, but hesitates to charge all that the traffic will bear because
of its knowledge that this will encourage research by other firms
directed at discovering new and superior processes not covered by
its patents. With a large investment in specialized plant and equipment and with perhaps a still larger investment in the research on
which its patent rights are based,1 it is convinced that the only way
to protect this investment is to keep the price of its product as low
as possible. This type of behavior is all the more likely if the market
demand for the product is highly elastic. The term potential competition is used to describe such situations as these.
We shall have occasion to return to this discussion later. At this
time it is important only to warn the reader that the phrase, "the
market for a good," requires specific definition whenever it is to be
used in analyzing actual behavior or as a guide to public policy.
Questions:
1. Distinguish between "ideal" and "pure" competition and identify the
conditions that must be satisfied in each case.
2. Distinguish between "performance" and "market organization" tests
of competition.
1
In Big Business: A New Era (New York: Harper & Bros., 1952-53), p. 69, David
E. Lilienthal reports that Du Pont spent $27,000,000 and more than thirteen years
before nylon could be put on the market. It took eleven years of research to perfect
Monsanto Chemical Company's new chemical substance for changing soil structure,
Kfilium.

72

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

3. Explain why many economists regard the concept of "pure" competition as a valuable analytical tool, despite the fact that it can never be
realized in the real world.
4. Identify the nine market situations listed in the text as representing
the principal deviations from pure markets and define the term
"market" as it is used in the text.
5. Give examples from your experience of "potential competition" and
the "competition of substitutes" and define the two terms.
6. What bearing, if any, have the two foregoing types of competition
on the determination of the existence or absence of competition?

7

Demand:
The Laws of Consumption

W E TURN now to a study of how
the signal system of an enterprise economy guides resources into
the uses desired by consumers. In Chapter 3 we identified the elements of the signal system as prices (including prices of resources
as well as prices of goods and services), profits, and losses. We start
our study of this system with the consumer, for it is the consumer
who generates the initial impulse. He does this by sending out a
"call" for particular goods and services. We shall trace this call as
it is interpreted by the firms, transmitted to the owners of resources,
and eventually answered by the production and sale of goods and
services. First, however, we must examine the nature of the call
itself. We must study human wants and how an individual ranks
them and decides which shall get satisfied and which shall go unsatisfied.
THE MEANING OF DEMAND
Individual demand. In economics the call of a consumer for a
particular item is known as his demand for that item. Individual
demand, as viewed by the economist, is a panoramic picture of a
particular consumer's attitude, or reaction, toward some particular
commodity. The economist defines individual demand as a schedule of the quantities of a good which a consumer stands ready to
take off the market at a series of prices at a given moment of time.
It is this schedule which represents his call for the good.
Market demand. The market demand for a good is the summation of the demand schedules of all of the individuals participating
in the market. This is illustrated in Table 7-1. The five prices in
73

74

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

the left-hand column are to be regarded as selections from a larger
range of prices beginning well above $2.00 a pound and declining
by penny (or smaller) intervals to a price well below 25^ a pound.
The reactions of consumers A, B, C, and D to the five prices are
shown in columns 2, 3, 4, and 5. Consumer A, for example, will buy
no coffee if the price is $2.00 and 7 pounds if the price is 25^. In
between these two prices, the quantities he would take, assuming
coffee can be bought in small fractions of a pound, would vary
continuously. The quantities bought at the prices shown in column 1 are his responses to a few of the specific prices in his total
schedule. The same holds true of consumers B, C, and D. The
total market call for coffee is shown in column 6. It is the summation of the calls of the participants. It is the market demand for
coffee. It shows the total number of pounds that the participants
will take at each of the selected prices.
TABLE 7-1
INDIVIDUAL AND MARKET DEMAND FOR COFFEE

Quantity in Pounds of Coffee Pui chased per Month
(1)
Price per
pound ($)
2.00

1.00
.75
.50
.25

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Consumer Consumer Consumer Consumer
A

B

C

D

0
1
2
4
7

1
2
3
4
5

0
0
0
0
1

2
4
6
8
10

(6)

Total
3
7
11
16
23

We stress the fact that demand, as used by the economist, refers
to a schedule linking a series of prices to a series of quantities. The
single word "demand" does not refer to the quantity purchased
at one particular price. For example, the economist does not say
that the market demand for coffee at a price of $1.00 is seven
pounds. Rather he says that the amount demanded or quantity
taken at a price of $1.00 is seven pounds. The single word "demand" is reserved to designate the entire schedule. A precise language is as important to the economist as it is to all other scientists.
Graphic presentation of demand. The economist finds it con-

venient and desirable to present material like that in Table 7-1 in
graphic form. In graphing demand schedules, it is customary to let

75

DEMAND: THE LAWS OF CONSUMPTION

the Y- or vertical-axis represent prices and the X- or horizontal-axis
represent quantities. Figure 7-1 is a graphic presentation of the
materials in Table 7-1.
Graphic presentation is very helpful in explaining the operation
of market forces. Considerable use will be made of the device
throughout the book. It should be remembered, however, that the
smooth curves of the economist's graphs reflect precise mathematical relationships which can never be completely realized in the real
world where prices and quantities cannot be varied by infinitely
small amounts. Thus the A curve in the Fig. 7-1 which shows A's

2

4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Quantity in pounds of coffee purchased per month

24

FIG. 7-1

demand for coffee is built upon the known relationship between
the 5 prices and the 5 quantities shown in A's demand schedule.
All that we really have is 5 points. When we connect them by a
smooth curve we make the assumption that the quantity of a good
can be varied by infinitely small amounts and that A will respond
to infinitely small changes in price by infinitely small changes in
the quantities he will buy. The same holds true for B, C, and D.
The curve marked T is the market demand curve.
We are now in a position to define demand curves. An individual
demand curve is a graphic statement or presentation of the quantities of a good which a particular consumer stands ready to take
off the market at all possible prices at a given moment of time.

76

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

A market demand curve is a graphic representation of the quantities of a good which all of the participants in a market stand
ready to take off the market at all possible prices at a given moment
of time.
THE DETERMINANTS OF DEMAND
The calls of consumers are their demands for the various goods
and services that can be produced in the economy. But what determines whether the call of a consumer for a particular good will
be loud or weak? Why does Consumer A stand ready to buy 4
rather than 2 or 8 pounds of coffee at a price of 50 cents? Why
is Consumer C unwilling to buy any at this price, whereas Consumer D is willing to buy 8 pounds?
The answers to these questions are to be found in three factors
which we shall call the determinants of demand. The three determinants are (1) the tastes and preferences of the consumer; (2)
the money resources of the consumer; and (3) the prices of related commodities.
Tastes and preferences. The first factor in determining a consumer's demand for a good is the intensity of his desire for the
good. His desire for the good is in turn determined by how much
satisfaction he expects to derive from using (consuming) the good.
The power of a good to satisfy human wants is referred to as its
utility. Obviously no two persons assign identical utilities to a
given good. Nor is there a standard unit in which utility may be
measured.
The phrase "tastes and preferences" refers not just to the utility
to the consumer of the good in question but to the relative utility
of the good. That is, the call which a consumer sends out for coffee is determined by how strongly he wants the coffee relative to
how strongly he wants other goods. It is this ranking or pattern
of preferences that is referred to in the phrase, "tastes and preferences."
The economist is not directly concerned with how this preference
pattern comes into existence. Nor is he directly concerned with
whether the consumer wants the "right" things. These are questions for the psychologist, the sociologist, the moralist, and others.
The economist is concerned only with how preference patterns influence the calls for goods and services in the economy.
Money resources. We are all painfully aware of the fact that
desire alone is not adequate to obtain a given good. It is not
enough to want coffee; it is necessary to back up this want with

DEMAND: T H E LAWS O F CONSUMPTION

77

something the seller wants. Thus Consumer C in Table 7-1 may
have wanted coffee as much as Consumer D but may have lacked
the money resources of Consumer D. We shall have something
to say later regarding the reasons for Consumer D's lack of money
resources. Here, however, we are concerned only with the fact that
he does lack money and that this is one of the factors influencing
his demand for coffee. Other things being equal, the greater a
person's money resources, the greater his demand for a good, and
vice versa.
Differences in demand may be more than or less than proportionate to differences in resources. In fact, there are goods for
which the demand tends to go down as the money resources of a
consumer go up! The less desirable cuts of meat and second-hand
clothes are goods of this kind. Coffee would be in the larger group
of goods and services for which the demand varies directly with
the money resources of consumers.
Increases or decreases in the money resources of all or of most
consumers produce significant changes in the relative pattern of
demands. This in turn calls for a substantial adjustment of resources and often presents serious problems to particular groups
and areas in the economy. If the change is a rapid fall in the
money resources of consumers, the problems may include serious
unemployment. We shall come back to the causes and consequences of economy-wide changes in money resources in our discussion of a country's money supply.
The prices of related commodities. The careful buyer takes account not only of how much he desires a given commodity and of
the size of his money resources, but also of the prices of related
commodities. For example, our coffee buyers would presumably
take into account the prices of tea and other substitutes for coffee.
They would also be influenced by the prices of cream and sugar,
complements of coffee.
Other things being equal, a fall in the price of tea (a substitute
for coffee) would reduce the demand for coffee, and vice versa.
A fall in the price of cream (a complement) would, on the other
hand, tend to increase the demand for coffee. These interrelationships of demand are very extensive and very intricate in a modern
economy. They account, in part, for the fact that a change in the
demand for one good will affect the demand for many others, thus
setting into motion reactions which carry through the entire economy. The changing demands of consumers thus affect all prices.
The resulting interdependence, in turn, accounts for the difficulty

78

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

governments have encountered in attempting a "partial" control
of economic activities.
CHANGES IN DEMAND
It should be clear from the discussion that a change in any one
of the determinants of demand produces a change in demand. If
the consumer comes to like coffee more or less than before, relative
to his wants for other goods, or if his money resources are increased or diminished, or if the prices of related commodities
change, the consumer's demand for coffee will change.
It may not be equally clear that demand changes only with a
change in one or more of these determinants. Particularly, it may
be difficult to see why a change in the price of coffee does not produce a change in the demand for coffee. The difference between
the effect of a change in the price of coffee and the effect of a
change in one of the determinants of the demand for coffee can
be seen by reference to Fig. 7-2.

Dr

2

4
6
8 101112 14 16 18 20 22
Quantity in pounds of coffee purchased per month
FIG.

24

7-2

The curved line, DD, represents the original demand for coffee.
An increase in demand, caused by a change in one or more of the
three determinants of demand, is represented by a new demand
curve, D'D', lying above and to the right of the original curve.

DEMAND: THE LAWS OF CONSUMPTION

79

Similarly, a decrease in demand is represented by a new demand
curve, D"D", lying below and to the left of the original curve.
With the original curve holding (that is, with no change in the
basic determinants of demand), a change in the price of coffee
from 75 cents a pound to 50 cents a pound would lead to a change
in the amount taken from 11 pounds per month to 16 pounds per
month—but would not cause a change in the demand (demand
curve) itself. A change in the demand itself can come only through
a change in one or more of the determinants of demand. The geometrician might prefer to think of a change in demand as involving
a movement to a new curve, whereas a change in the price of the
good involves only a movement along the old curve.
THE LAW OF DEMAND
The demand schedules presented in Table 7-1 indicated that
the consumers were willing to buy more coffee at lower prices than
at higher prices. We shall find this relationship to be characteristic
of all demand schedules. This relationship between prices and
quantities taken is often referred to as the law of demand. The
law states that, other things being equal, the quantity of a good
that will be purchased varies inversely with the price of the good.
That is, the lower the price, the larger the quantity, and vice
versa.
If this law be valid, how then can we explain the fact that Americans were buying more coffee in 1950 than in 1940, although the
price of coffee was substantially higher in 1950 than in 1940? The
answer is that other things did not remain equal between 1940 and
1950. Particularly the money resources of consumers increased
substantially during this period of time. The resulting movement
of the demand curve for coffee explains the seeming paradox.
Marginal utility. The reason for the inverse relationship between
prices and quantities taken lies in part in a psychological principle
known as the law of diminishing marginal utility. In inexact language, this law states that the more a person has of something, the
less he values any one unit of it.
A more precise statement of the law requires a definition of
marginal utility. Utility was defined before as the power of a
good to satisfy human wants. It may also be thought of as the
property of a good which leads consumers to wish to acquire it.
Table 7-2 presents a schedule of the satisfaction a given consumer
would derive from consuming various quantities of homogeneous

80

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

good. We shall use a fictitious unit, the util, to measure levels of
satisfaction.
TABLE 7-2

Cups of Coffee
Total
Consumed per day Utility (utils)

Marginal
Utility (utils)
10

1

10

2

19

3

26

4

30

5

31

6

29

9
7
4
1
—2

This consumer (who obviously is not one of the twenty-cups-a-day
men so dear to the heart of the Brazilian coffee grower) finds that,
up to a point, his total satisfaction increases as his consumption
of coffee increases. However, the rate of increase is constantly diminishing. The fourth cup per day would add only four units of
satisfaction whereas the third would add seven, the second nine,
and the first ten units of satisfaction.
These figures, which measure the change in total satisfaction as
consumption increases, are given in the column headed "Marginal
Utility." Marginal utility, then, is the increase in total satisfaction
which comes with a unit increase in the rate of consumption of a
good. At a rate of consumption of three cups of coffee per day, total
utility is twenty-six units and marginal utility is seven units (the
difference between twenty-six and nineteen). At a rate of consumption of four, total utility is thirty and marginal utility is four
(the difference between thirty and twenty-six).1
The material in Table 7-2 indicates that marginal utility diminishes as the rate of consumption increases, other things being
1

The figure, 4, representing the marginal utility at a rate of consumption of four,
is placed between the row starting with a rate of consumption of three and the row
starting with a rate of consumption of four. For reasons that do not concern us here,
a marginal quantity should be shown (and plotted, if graphic presentation is being
used) at the mid-point of the interval to which it applies, rather than at either end
of that interval.

DEMAND: THE LAWS OF CONSUMPTION

81

2

equal. This is the principle of diminishing marginal utility. How
does it help us explain the inverse relationship between prices and
quantities taken? In this way: When the coffee drinker buys coffee, he is sacrificing satisfactions that could be gained by spending
the money on other goods and services. The second cup of coffee a
day is "worth" nine units of satisfaction to him (that is, he would
lose nine units of satisfaction if he were to drink one rather than
two cups a day); the fifth cup is "worth" only one unit of satisfaction. Consequently, this coffee drinker would give up more to
acquire a second cup a day than he would a fifth cup. As the sacrifice entailed in getting a cup of coffee (the price per cup) goes
down, his rate of consumption of coffee goes up; as the price goes
up, his rate of consumption goes down.
The principle of diminishing marginal utility explains the inverse relationship between prices and quantities shown in the demand schedule of an individual consumer for a particular good.
When we turn to the market demand for a good, we find that other
factors contribute to this result as well. A factor of particular importance is an unequal distribution of money resources. At a high
price for a commodity, its use may be limited to the very wealthy.
At a lower price, the way is opened for people with fewer resources to enter the market. This means that more coffee would
be sold in a market at a lower price than at a higher price even if
the marginal utility of coffee to many consumers did not diminish
as the rate of consumption increased.
Some applications of diminishing marginal utility. The principle

of diminishing marginal utility has been put to many uses. For
example, it has been used in attempts to show that even the
gambler who "breaks even" over a period of time suffers a net
loss of satisfactions. The assumption is that the marginal utility
of money diminishes with increases in an individual's stock of
money in the same way as the marginal utility of any other commodity. Given this assumption, it can be demonstrated that a
dollar won in a given gamble adds less to the satisfactions of the
individual than the reduction in satisfactions from the loss of a
dollar. It follows that even "breaking even" over time involves a
net loss of satisfactions.
2

The illustration shows marginal utility diminishing from the very first unit. It is
not impossible for marginal utility first to increase, then to diminish as the rate of
consumption is increased from zero. The second cup of coffee at breakfast may make
a larger contribution to the coffee-drinker's satisfactions than did the first. Diminishing marginal utility might not set in until the third or fourth cup. This possibility
does not reduce the usefulness of the concept of diminishing marginal utility.

82

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

This analysis ignores the satisfactions the gambler derives from
the gambling itself, regardless of winnings or losses. Also, the
validity of the assumption of diminishing marginal utility of money
is difficult to prove or disprove. It is on this same assumption that
some part of the argument in support of equalization of money
incomes is based. It is argued that total satisfactions could be increased by taking dollars away from the rich, to whom each dollar
means little, and giving them to the poor, to whom each dollar
means much.
The important question in an enterprise economy is not whether
this argument is correct or incorrect; it is whether it would be desirable to act on the basis of the thesis if it were correct. To take
the full action implied in the thesis would be to destroy the incentive system of an enterprise economy and, hence, to force the
people to select some other type of economic system. This they
may be willing to do; however, if they desire to continue to use
an enterprise system, they must recognize that a forced and radical equalization of incomes is inconsistent with the operating requirements of the system.
We shall return to this topic in our discussions of fiscal policy and
of other forms of economic organization.
THE CONSUMERS SPENDING PATTERN
The law of demand shows why a would-be coffee drinker must
weigh the satisfaction gained by drinking one more cup of coffee
a day against the sacrifice he makes when he spends his money
on the cup of coffee rather than on something else. From this
it follows that the careful buyer will not spend his money on one
commodity if he can obtain a larger increase in satisfaction by
spending it on one or more other commodities.
If all commodities could be purchased in minute fractions of a
unit and if the dollar could be divided into minute fractions of a
dollar, the careful buyer would allocate his money resources in
such a way that the last minute fraction of a dollar spent on one
commodity would bring the same increase in satisfaction as the
same fraction of a dollar spent on any other commodity. A consumer who had allocated his money in this way would be in an
equilibrium position. He could not gain by buying less of one commodity and more of another. Hence his spending pattern would
remain unchanged until such time as one or more of the determinants of his demand changed. A situation in which all consum-

DEMAND: THE LAWS OF CONSUMPTION

83

ers have attained their equilibrium positions is referred to as one
of general equilibrium in consumer spending.
In the real world various factors limit the ability of the individual
consumer to reach his equilibrium spending pattern. In the first
place, the average consumer does not buy with the care needed to
bring him to the equilibrium position. Also, neither goods nor
money is infinitely divisible. Consequently, the average consumer
arrives, at best, at a very rough approximation of the equilibrium
pattern.
In spite of this, the concept of consumer equilibrium provides us
with a useful insight into some of the tendencies at work in the
real world. After all, the average consumer does attempt to "get
the most for his money." General equilibrium is simply a description of the situation that would exist if all consumers were completely successful in doing so.
Questions:
1. Define (a) individual demand schedule, (b) individual demand
curve, (c) market demand schedule, (d) market demand curve.
2. If a person's desire for a good is determined by how much satisfaction he expects to get from using it, what is the explanation for the
fact that the market value of a diamond in the United States greatly
exceeds that of a loaf of bread? Can you imagine a situation in which
the converse would be true?
3. Identify the determinants of demand and illustrate the effect of a
change in each on an individual's demand schedule.
4. Explain and illustrate by diagram the difference between "a change
in demand" and "a change in the quantity demanded."
5. State the law of demand and explain it by use of the principle of
diminishing marginal utility.
6. State the principle of diminishing marginal utility. Argue for or
against the validity of the proposition: "The principle proves that
the economic well being of the members of a society would be maximized if money incomes were equalized."
7. Identify the concept of "consumer equilibrium" and indicate with
supporting reasons whether an individual can ever attain this type of
equilibrium. If it is unattainable, what useful purpose does the concept serve?

8
Demand Elasticities

JLHE law of demand describes the
direction of the response of the consumer to a change in price. We
turn now to a study of the intensity of the response of the consumer
to a change in price. This aspect of consumer behavior is studied
under the heading, elasticity of demand. In the second part of the
chapter we shall use the elasticity concept to describe the demand
for a good as it is seen by the managers of firms operating under
the discipline of competition.

THE MEANING OF ELASTICITY
The law of demand describes the fact that, other things being
equal, consumers will buy more of a good at a lower price than at a
higher price. The elasticity concept asks the question, "Is the
change in quantity taken more than, less than, or just proportionate
to the change in price?" In other words, how intense is the response of the consumer to the change in price?
The elasticity of demand is defined as the percentage change in
quantity taken divided by the percentage change in price. For example, if a 10 percent reduction in price were to lead to a 20 percent increase in quantity taken, the elasticity of demand would be
equal to —2. If a 10 percent reduction in price were to lead to a
5 percent increase in quantity taken, the elasticity of demand would
be equal to —0.5. (The minus sign identifies the fact that prices
and quantities taken vary inversely. Because prices and quantities
offered by suppliers usually vary directly, the elasticity of supply
with which we shall be concerned presently usually carries a plus
sign.)
DEGREES OF ELASTICITY
The economist recognizes degrees of elasticity ranging from zero
to infinity with unit elasticity as the dividing line, separating de84

DEMAND ELASTICITIES

85

mands that are said to be elastic from demands that are said to be
inelastic. It is important to note that all demands except those
represented by the limiting case of zero elasticity have some degree
of elasticity. All that is meant when it is said that a demand is inelastic is that it possesses elasticity greater than zero but less than
unity.
Demand is said to be elastic when the percentage change in
quantity taken is greater than the percentage change in price. It is
said to be inelastic when the percentage change in quantity taken
is less than the percentage change in price. Demand is said to
possess unit elasticity (or to have an elasticity of unity) when the
percentage change in quantity taken is equal to the percentage
change in price.
At one extreme is the completely (or infinitely) elastic demand.
A minute change in price produces an enormous change in quantity
taken. It is represented graphically by a straight line parallel to the
X- or quantity-axis at the level of the going price. The demand
represented by the straight line
Di in Fig. 8-1 is infinitely elas- Price
tic. It is uniquely associated
with the demand facing the
seller under competition.
At the other extreme is the
completely inelastic demand.
Consumers are completely unresponsive to a price change.
They will buy a given quantity
of the good regardless of the
price. It is represented graphically by a straight line perpendicular to the X-axis at the
given quantity. The demand represented by the straight line D2 in
Fig. 8-1 is completely inelastic.
A demand with unit elasticity is represented graphically by a
rectangular hyperbola. The demand represented by the curve D3
in Fig. 8-1 possesses unit elasticity. In general, the more elastic the
demand curve, the closer it approaches a straight line parallel to
the X-axis. A relatively elastic demand is illustrated by the D4 curve
in Fig. 8-2. The more inelastic a curve, the closer it approaches a
straight line perpendicular to the X-axis. A relatively inelastic demand is illustrated by the curve D5 in Fig. 8-2. However, the appearance of a demand curve is not always a reliable guide to the

86
Price

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION
,

elasticity of demand. T h e measures of elasticity described later
are more reliable tests of t h e degree of elasticity t h a n are visual
tests.
T h e typical d e m a n d schedule
(curve) will n o t possess constant
elasticity throughout. It m a y exhibit relative inelasticity over
some ranges of prices, unit elasticQuantity
ity over other ranges, a n d relative
FIG. 8-2
elasticity over still other ranges.
A straight-line d e m a n d curve, far from possessing a constant degree
of elasticity, is possessed of a different degree of elasticity at each
point on t h e line (except in t h e limiting cases of infinitely elastic
and completely inelastic demands). Thuj; when t h e d e m a n d for a
commodity is described as elastic (or inelastic) what is usually meant
is that over t h e range of prices relevant to t h e problem at h a n d t h e
d e m a n d is elastic (or inelastic).
T H E SIGNIFICANCE O F ELASTICITY
To w h a t purposes m a y this concept b e p u t ? H o w does it contribute to an understanding of behavior in t h e real world? I n t h e
first place, everyone w h o has anything to sell is interested in t h e
elasticity of d e m a n d for t h e good or service h e is selling. If h e reduces t h e price, will consumers b u y a little more or a lot more? If
h e raises t h e price, will consumers b u y a little less or a lot less? A
common goal of t h e market research undertaken b y modern business firms is to make a rough approximation of the elasticity of
d e m a n d for t h e products of the firms. An important purpose of
advertising is to increase t h e d e m a n d for t h e product advertised
and make t h e n e w d e m a n d more inelastic.
Whenever sellers are taking joint action, they are particularly interested in t h e elasticity of demand. For example, when workers
are taking joint action through a union, they wish to know whether
an increase in wages will lead to a large or small drop in employm e n t opportunities. I n general, t h e more inelastic t h e d e m a n d for
the labor of t h e workers, t h e more vigorously will t h e union press
demands for a wage increase.
Our present farm program owes its existence to t h e fact that t h e
d e m a n d for m a n y agricultural products is inelastic. Because consumers are relatively insensitive to price changes, a large reduction

DEMAND ELASTICITIES

87

in price is needed to clear the market of an above-average crop.
Farmers as a group are frequently in the unfortunate position of
having to sell a larger crop for less than a smaller crop! The crop
restriction programs undertaken in agriculture would never have
been considered had the demand for farm products been elastic
rather than inelastic.
The elasticity concept is a tool of analysis that must be part of
the equipment of every economist—and every student of economics.
MEASURES OF ELASTICITY
The definition of elasticity of demand as the percentage change
in quantity taken divided by the percentage change in price is itself
a measure of the degree of elasticity. However, other measures can
be developed from this definition, measures that are often more
convenient or more meaningful. These measures derive from two
further definitions which can usefully be introduced at this point.
Total revenue. The total revenue from the sale of a given quantity of a good is defined as the price per unit multiplied by the number of units sold at that price. Thus, in Table 8-1, the total revenue
from the sale of coffee at a price of $1.00 would be $1.00 multiplied by 2 (the quantity taken), or $2.00. The total revenue at a
price of 75^ would be 75^ multiplied by 3, or $2.25.
Marginal revenue. Marginal revenue is the change in total revenue per unit change in quantity sold. From Table 8-1, it is apparent
that total revenue will rise from $2.00 to $2.25 if the price is reduced from $1.00 to 75^. The additional or marginal revenue at a
rate of sales of 3 is thus 25^.
TABLE 8-1

Price per
Pound

Pounds of
Coffee
Taken

Total
Revenue

$2.00

1

$2.00

1.00

2

2.00

.75

3

2.25

.50

4

2.00

.25

5

1.25

Marginal
Revenue

Arc Elasticity of
Demand

$0.00

-1.00

0.25

-1.40

-0.25

- .71

-0.75

- .33

88

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

Another way of viewing marginal revenue at a given rate of sales
is to look on it as the change in total revenue that would come if
the rate of sales were reduced by one. Thus, at a rate of 3, 25^ of
total revenue would be "lost" by a price increase which reduced the
rate of sales to 2.
Elasticity and total revenue. Degrees of elasticity can be identified by the changes in total revenue associated with price changes.
If, between two prices, the price and the total revenue vary inversely, the demand between those prices is elastic. Thus, in Table
8-1, inspection shows that as the price falls from $1.00 to 75^ the
total revenue goes up. Or, reversing the direction, as the price goes
up, the total revenue goes down. This means that the demand is
elastic between these two prices.
If, between two prices, the price and the total revenue vary
directly, the demand within this price range is inelastic. In Table
8-1, total revenue goes down between 75^ and 50^. This means that
the demand is inelastic in this range.
If the total revenue remains constant between any two consecutive prices, the demand between those prices has unit elasticity. In
Table 8-1, the total revenue does not change between the prices of
$2.00 and $1.00. The change in quantity taken just offsets the
change in price. This means that the demand has unit elasticity
within this price range.
It should be noted that it is most unlikely that the demand for a
commodity would possess the same degree of elasticity throughout
any large range of prices. This is true in the case of a single consumer. It is still more true in the case of a large group of consumers
with different money incomes and different preference patterns, as
may be seen by looking back at Fig. 7-1 in the preceding chapter.
The T or market demand curve becomes progressively more elastic
as more and more consumers enter the market.
Variations in total revenue as a result of price changes provide a
very useful measure of elasticity. Firms are interested in the effect
of price changes on dollar sales (total revenue), and this measure
is stated in just these terms. The ease with which this measure can
be computed is another factor in its favor.
Marginal revenue and elasticity. The measure of elasticity given
above is stated in terms of changes in total revenue. Because marginal revenue is a measure of changes in total revenue, the elasticity
of demand can also be determined by the sign of the marginal revenue at a given rate of sales. If marginal revenue is positive, demand
is elastic; if marginal revenue is negative, demand is inelastic; if

DEMAND ELASTICITIES

89

marginal revenue is zero, demand has unit elasticity. A brief check
of Table 8-1 will confirm these statements.
Arc elasticity of demand. The foregoing measures of elasticity
of demand can be used to determine whether demand has an elasticity greater than, less than, or equal to unity. However, they do
not yield an exact figure. The following formula (which can be
derived from the definition of demand) provides a convenient way
of computing the exact degree of elasticity of demand:
go-Pi
Qo + Qi
Elasticity =
where Po and Qo represent one price and the quantity taken at that
price; Px and Qi represent another price and the quantity taken at
that price.
For example from Table 8-1 let $1.00 be Po and 75^ be Pt; Qo
would then be 2, and Qx would be 3. Substituting these values in
the arc elasticity formula yields an arc elasticity of demand figure
of —1.40.
If the figure derived in this way falls between a minus one and a
minus infinity, the demand is elastic. If it falls between zero and a
minus one, the demand is inelastic. If it is equal to a minus one, the
demand possesses unit elasticity.
The interpretation of the exact figure is as follows: An arc elasticity of demand of —3 means that a 1 percent change in price will
induce a 3 percent change in quantity taken. An arc elasticity of
demand of —0.5 means that a 1 percent change in price will induce
an 0.5 percent change in quantity taken.
THE DETERMINANTS OF ELASTICITY

What determines whether the demand for a good will be elastic
or inelastic? The answer to this question is to be found in large
part in the relationship of goods to one another. These relationships were noted in the discussion of the determinants of demand in
the preceding chapter. It was pointed out there that some goods
are substitutes for others, and that some goods are complements
of others.
The role of substitution. In general, the existence of close substitutes for a commodity tends to make the demand for the com-

90

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

modity elastic. Conversely, the demand for a commodity for which
there are no close substitutes tends to be inelastic.
To illustrate, if the price of maple syrup were to increase, many
consumers would turn to other kinds of syrup. If the price of maple
syrup were to decrease, many consumers would change from other
syrups to maple syrup. The availability of close substitutes makes
consumers sensitive to changes in the price of maple syrup; hence
the demand for it tends to be elastic.
On the other hand, consumers would probably buy about as
much table salt after as before a price rise because there are no close
substitutes for salt for seasoning purposes, and also because in the
United States today the outlay for salt is insignificant in the total
food budget of even the poorest family.
A highly inelastic demand exerts a powerful attraction on
would-be monopolists. A group of Michigan salt producers once
attempted to gain control of the entire salt-producing industry in
this country. Their efforts were unsuccessful because they could
not control the entry into the market of salt from abroad and from
new production centers in this country. The consumer who is not
protected by the existence of substitutes may be protected by the
competition of rival producers.
The role of complementarity. Complementarity also influences
the elasticity of demand. In general, consumers are less sensitive
to changes in the prices of goods that are used jointly with other
goods than they are to changes in the prices of goods that are used
alone. The inelastic demand for salt is due, in part, to the fact that
people do not "take it straight." The demand for lubricating oil for
use in automobiles provides another illustration of the importance
of complementarity. For example, even a 50 percent increase in the
price of lubricating oil would mean only a small percent increase
in the total cost of operating a car. Hence the demand for oil for
this use tends to be quite inelastic. On the other hand, a 50 percent
rise in the price of fuel oil would lead many householders to shift
to coal or gas. A similar rise in the price of salt might affect the
industrial and other demands for salt. Many of us would probably
scrape the ice off our sidewalks instead of letting salt do the work.
In these situations the existence of substitutes dominates the complementarity effect.
The same kind of reasoning explains why the demand for any one
type of building trades labor will tend to be inelastic, much more
inelastic than the demand for houses. This fact explains the strong
bargaining position of each of the building trades labor groups.

DEMAND ELASTICITIES

91

TIME AND ELASTICITY
It may be difficult for a consumer to turn to a substitute for a
good immediately after an increase in the price of the good. However, when given time, the consumer may be able to replace coal
with gas (or vice versa) as a heating fuel, or to give himself haircuts rather than rely on a barber. In the same way the firm confronted with a sharp increase in the price of one of the materials
used in its product may be forced to maintain its purchases of the
material for some time. Given time, however, to carry on research,
redesign the product or the machinery used in making the product,
and otherwise adjust to the price increase, the firm may be able to
reduce its purchases of the material or even stop using it altogether.
In short, because substitution is a time-consuming process, the
demand for a good is always less elastic in the short-run than in the
long-run. The bricklayers who ask and receive an increase in wages
may notice little immediate change in employment opportunities.
However as consumers gradually substitute other materials for
brick, the employment effect of the wage change becomes apparent.
It is important for the student of economics to keep in mind this
difference between short- and long-run elasticities of demand.
DEMAND FACING THE FIRM UNDER COMPETITION
We are now in a position to describe the demand for a commodity
as it is viewed by the manager of a firm selling under competitive
conditions. The competitive conditions referred to here are those
listed on page 68 of Chapter 6, in particular the conditions that the
output consist of completely standardized units and that the number of firms in the industry is so large that a change in the output
of any one firm cannot increase or decrease total output enough to
cause a finite change in market price. Under such conditions each
firm knows that it can sell as many units as it wishes at the going
market price; that it cannot sell a single unit if it asks more than
the going price; and that it takes an unnecessary loss on every unit
it sells below the going price. This is the situation facing the individual growers of such crops as corn, wheat, and cotton, or the
brokers who are dealing in the stocks and bonds of great corporations like General Motors or General Electric. In this kind of a
situation the demand facing the individual firm is said to be infinitely elastic, and can be presented graphically as in Fig. 8-3. DD'
is the demand curve confronting this particular firm. It is parallel

92

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

to the X-axis and at the height, P, which represents the market
price.
y

)

*

D'

FIG. 8-3

The extreme sensitivity of consumers to price changes by individual firms in a large competitive market is due to the existence of
substitutes. All bushels of wheat (of the same grade) are perfect
substitutes for one another. Hence the demand for any one farmer's
wheat must be infinitely elastic, despite the fact that the total or
market demand for wheat probably has an elasticity of less than
unity.
This assertion that market demand for the output of an industry
can be relatively inelastic while the demand confronting each individual firm is infinitely elastic sounds paradoxical. A moment's
reflection, however, will clear up the ambiguity. The fact that one
firm in, say, 100,000 can increase its output without depressing
market price does not mean that all or the majority of the firms
can increase their outputs simultaneously without provoking a fall
in price. If all or most of them increase their outputs, the demand
confronting the individual firm will still be infinitely elastic, but at
a lower price. In Fig. 8-3 the DD' curve would now be represented
by a horizontal straight line closer to the X-axis.
The infinitely elastic demand diagram also reveals another significant fact. The marginal revenue of the individual firm selling under
competitive conditions is always the same as the market price. Obviously if each additional unit can be sold at the prevailing price,
then the increase in total revenue from the sale of an additional unit
—and this is what marginal revenue means—must always be equal
to the prevailing price. The firm's marginal revenue curve is identical with the demand curve confronting it. This equality between
marginal revenue and price holds only for infinitely elastic demand
curves.
In the next chapter we shall be concerned with the considerations
that determine how much output a competitive firm will put on the
market at various prices. Then, in a subsequent chapter, we shall
show how the forces of supply and demand interact to determine
the actual output and the actual price.

DEMAND ELASTICITIES

93

Questions:
1. Define elasticity of demand; identify verbally and graphically the
degrees of elasticity mentioned in the text; show how these degrees
of elasticity can be measured; indicate by concrete examples some
uses which economists make of demand elasticities.
2. The elasticity of demand for one of the items in each of the following
pairs will be greater than for the other. Check the one for which
you think the demand will be greater and give your reasons.
(a) meat in general
beef
(b) Ford cars
automobiles in general
(c) Chevrolet
Cadillac
(d) salt for seasoning
meat
(e) salt for seasoning
salt for melting ice on sidewalks
(f) wooden roofing shingles . .. houses
(g) wool coats
mink coats
(h) the product of a given
the product of a firm in the
industry
industry
(i) cotton shirts
raw cotton
3. Assuming pure competition, what is the relationship between market price and a firm's marginal revenue? Define marginal revenue
and market price.
4. "The gains from restricting output are related to the elasticity of the
demand curve confronting an industry." Explain.
5. State with supporting reasons whether the elasticity of the demand
curve confronting an industry is likely to be greater in the long-run
than in the short-run.
6. What relevance, if any, has the difference in the short- and the longrun elasticity of demand confronting an industry on the likelihood
that the firms in the industry will attempt to restrict output?

9
Supply: The Laws of Production

A HE calls of the consumers have
now been traced from the households to the firms. The nature of
the call for a given good as it is seen by competitive firms has been
identified. We turn now to a study of the responses of the firms
to this call. These responses take the form of producing goods and
services and offering them for sale. In other words, they represent
the supply side of the famous pair, supply and demand.
Supply defined. Individual supply is defined as a schedule of the
quantities of a good which a given seller stands ready to place on
the market at a series of prices at a given moment of time. In a
competitive market, market supply is a summation of the individual
supply schedules. As in the case of demand, individual and market
supply may be presented graphically in the form of supply curves.
Supply illustrated. The quantities shown in columns 2, 3, 4 and
5 in Table 9-1 are the quantities of a particular good that would
be placed on the market by four sellers at each of five prices. Again,
this is just a "sample" drawn from the full schedule; the full schedTABLE 9-1
QUANTITY OFFERED IN POUNDS PER MONTH

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Price
per lb.

Seller

Seller

Seller

(5)
Seller

A

B

C

D

Total
Offered

$2.00
1.00

100
70
50
20
0

50
20
0
0
0

80
70
70
70
50

200
100
50
0
0

430
260
170
90
50

.75
.50
.25

94

(6)

SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION

95

ule would show the quantities that would be offered at each of
a great number of prices. The figures in column 6 represent the
total number of units the four sellers would place on the market at
each price. In other words, column 6 represents the market supply.
The significant thing to note in this table is the fact that the
quantity offered (in contrast to the quantity taken) varies directly
with the price. That is, the higher the price, the more units offered for sale, and vice versa. It also can be seen that some sellers
are more sensitive to price changes than others. We shall have occasion to return to these characteristics of supply in later sections.
BEHIND SUPPLY
We were able to identify the factors that lie behind demand;
we must now attempt to do the same for supply. All of the factors
lying behind supply can be summarized in the one word: cost.
The quantity of a good that will be offered at a given price is determined by the cost to the seller of making it available.
Cost. Cost is another of the elusive concepts in economics. Cost
to the economist is not necessarily the same thing as cost to the
accountant or the businessman or the sociologist or the government
policy maker. The economist defines cost and classifies the various
types of cost in such a way as to permit him to explain the workings
of an economic system. His definition should be judged on how
well it contributes to this goal and not on whether it is consistent
with other definitions of cost.
Opportunity cost. The economist's definition of cost is constructed in terms of opportunities foregone. The cost of doing any
one thing is measured by what is lost in not doing something else.
This is the meaning of "opportunity cost."
Adam Smith illustrated the principle of opportunity cost in the
following way: A hunter can always bring back one deer from a
day's hunting if he hunts in one direction from the village. He
can always bring back two beaver from a day's hunting if he hunts
in the other direction. What then is the cost of one deer? The
answer: two beaver. What is the cost of one beaver? The answer:
one-half deer. In the same way, in our modern economy, the cost
of an automobile is the refrigerators, stoves, or other goods that
could have been produced by the resources used to produce the car.
Opportunity costs cannot be measured directly in a complex, specialized economy. However, they are reflected in the prices that
the firms must pay to secure resources. To obtain the resources
to produce an automobile, the manufacturer must bid labor, steel,

96

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

and other resources away from the firms producing refrigerators,
stoves, and so forth. The resulting prices of these resources are a
measure of the opportunities foregone.
BEHIND COST
The cost to a firm of producing a given quantity of output is
determined by two factors: (1) the number of units of each type
of resource required to produce that output and (2) the price it
must pay for each unit of each type of resource. The first is related
to resources as physical entities, and to production as a technological problem of combining inputs (resources) to produce outputs
(goods and services). The second is related to resources as economic entities, and to production as an economic problem of minimizing the cost of any given output.
Production as a technological problem. Production involves the
use of resources and techniques. In this sense it is a problem for the
engineer and not the economist. This fact is so obvious that it has
led to the suggestion that the running of our economy should be
turned over exclusively to engineers and scientists. This was the
recommendation of the brilliant but eccentric economist, Thorstein
Veblen. This idea, under the title of Technocracy, was advanced as
a cure for the depression of the 1930s. Unfortunately many of the
decisions that must be made if the wishes of consumers are to
prevail are beyond the competence of the engineer as such.
PRODUCTION: CRUSOE MODEL
We shall start our study of production with an examination of
the problems confronting Robinson Crusoe. This child of Defoe's
fertile brain is the manager of the firm, the landlord, the capitalist,
and the consumer all rolled into one. He has more wants than he
can satisfy. He has to rank them and decide which he will try to
satisfy and to what extent and in what way. He has to balance the
disagreeableness of additional hours of labor against the agreeableness of additional food and creature comforts. As we guess at his
decisions we shall discover certain important relationships which,
though present, are easily lost sight of in our complex society. Only
as we keep these relationships in mind can we grasp the design of
modern capitalistic production.
Durable consumer goods and tools require saving. Let us start
with the assumption that Crusoe can keep himself in good physical
shape by working 6 hours a day. As long as he is content thus to
limit his working hours, that is all he can have. But being an Eng-

SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION

97

lishman accustomed to the comforts and conveniences of life, mere
subsistence is not enough. He decides to work 12 hours a day and
get ahead in the world. Immediately he is forced to choose. Shall
he gather more fruits and berries and snare more fish and grow fat
or devote the additional 6 hours to building himself a crude shelter?
Since the marginal utility of additional food is relatively low and
the marginal utility of shelter is high, he decides in favor of the
shelter. He builds himself a durable consumer good at the cost of
leisure.
Once the cabin is built, another problem arises—the problem of
drinking and cooking water. A spring of pure water is located on
rising ground a quarter of a mile inland while the cabin is located
close to the shore where he can command a view of the ocean—
the direction from which help must come if he is ever to get back
home. Since he is spending an hour a day carrying water to the
cabin in hollow gourds, he decides to cut down some trees, split
them lengthwise, hollow them out and build a trough or aquaduct
that will provide him with an abundant supply of fresh cool water.
He devotes 6 hours a day to the task and in 3 weeks it is done.
Investment of time and effort also necessary. The trough is a new
tool—an enormous labor-saving device. Henceforth he need devote only 5 hours to food gathering. He has gained an hour which
he can convert into leisure or expend in the production of further
labor-saving devices. He elects to cut his workday to 11 hours and
to devote 6 to fashioning himself a crude canoe and a paddle with
which he can get out beyond the breakers where the fishing is
better. With this job done he can now catch as many fish in an
hour as previously he had in 3 hours. He has saved another 2 hours.
Three hours of work a day now suffice to keep him physically fit.
From now on he has a substantial surplus of time on his hands
which he can use entirely for the further improvement of his dwelling, for making clothes, a comfortable bed, a chair, cooking utensils
and other conveniences or for making more tools, for example a bow
and arrows; or he can divide his surplus time between all of
these and cut down his working day still further.
Day by day and week by week Crusoe plans his production and
consumption program with a view to maximizing his satisfactions
and minimizing his dissatisfactions. If he is a bit of a philosopher,
or just plain lazy, his work week may be reduced rather rapidly.
In that event, his material level of living will remain extraordinarily
austere. If he is inventive, loves working with his hands and enjoys

98

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

creature comforts, his work week will remain long and his material
level of living will continue to rise.
Round-about methods of production. Let us see now what lessons can be drawn from this Robinson Crusoe economics. The first
is that labor, at least beyond some reasonable amount, is irksome.
It was the comforts and conveniences which Crusoe conjured up
in his mind that kept him at work from dawn to dark. Second,
Crusoe discovered that the easiest and quickest way to produce
the comforts and conveniences was to take out time to make tools.
Crusoe, the food gatherer, had to get together enough food to take
care of himself and Crusoe the tool maker. Had we started with
Crusoe and his man Friday we might have assigned to Friday the
task of food gathering and to Crusoe the task of tool making. Either
way it is clear that tool making depends on the creation of a surplus—in this case, time—and the investment of this surplus in tool
making.
Capital goods or capital. The economist calls these tools "capital," or the products of past labor used for further production. Capital is productive in the sense that it enables a worker to turn out
during the physical life of the tools more goods or services than
without the tools; moreover, things which he could not make at all
without the tools can now be made. We must, of course, account
for the time required to make the tools. If a tool lasted only a few
days and it took a long time to make it, Crusoe would have to do
some very careful reckoning before deciding to make another.
The physical wearing out of the tool is part of the cost of producing the goods or services made with the aid of the tool. Modern
business firms set up special accounts known as amortization reserves to take care of this physical wearing out of tools. In a money
economy the reserve should be large enough to buy replacement
tools at the appropriate time.
Crusoe may also be confronted with the problem of obsolescence.
Thus it is quite likely that his first canoe will be a rather crude
affair. As his condition improves he may decide to take time and
fashion himself a lighter and better one, after which he throws the
old one away or sets it aside as stand-by equipment against the
chance of an accident to his new canoe. Thus the economic life of
a tool may be much shorter than its physical life, and it is its economic life that really matters. Obsolescence reserves are used to
protect firms from the losses resulting from the necessity of scrapping perfectly good tools simply because so much better ones
have been invented that it would be wasteful to continue to use

SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION

99

the old ones. Needless to say, the economic life of a tool is much
less predictable than its physical life.
THE LAW OF DIMINISHING RETURNS
Whether on Crusoe's island or Manhattan Island, production involves the use of labor, land, and capital. These resources may be
combined in different proportions. Which proportion to use in producing a given output is one of the decisions confronting the manager of the firm, whether he be Robinson Crusoe or the president
of General Motors.
In making this decision, the manager of the firm encounters one
of the underlying principles of economic activity, the law of nonproportional outputs, or, as it is more commonly known, the law of
diminishing returns.1 This law defines a relationship between inputs (resources) and outputs (goods and services), with a given
level of technology. It states that, as an increasing number of units
of one resource are applied to a fixed number of units of other resources, output first increases at an increasing rate, then at a diminishing rate, and eventually decreases absolutely. That point in the
application of the variable resource beyond which output increases
at a diminishing rate is known as the point of diminishing returns.
The assumption of an unchanging technology is an essential part
of the law of diminishing returns. The law does not deny that
progress in the technical arts may delay indefinitely the tendency
to diminishing returns. However, at a given moment of time, the
production plan of the firm must be constructed with the use of
specific techniques of production. Once the plan is in operation,
it cannot be revoked overnight; the buildings, machines, and tools
cannot be revised each day to take account of changes in technological possibilities. In other words, the assumption of a given level
of technology does not destroy the usefulness of the law of diminishing returns as an explanation of behavior in economic life.
All that is necessary to establish the validity of the law is to ask
what the world would be like if it were not true. The world's food
1

This law is usually associated with the early 19th-century economist, David Ricardo. Ricardo developed the relationship with land treated as the fixed input. Later
economists demonstrated that the law holds whether the fixed input is land, labor,
capital, or management. To emphasize the general applicability of the law, economists have identified it in such phrases as "the law of variable proportions" and
"the law of nonproportional outputs," while reserving "the law of diminishing returns" to refer to cases in which land is the fixed input. While recognizing the greater
precision of this usage, the authors will continue to use these three identifications
interchangeably.

100

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

supply could be grown by simply adding increased "doses" of labor
and capital to a few plots of ground. The total supply of any given
manufactured good could be produced by simply adding larger
and larger quantities of labor to one plant. Even a cursory inspection of the world about us is sufficient to establish the fact that production takes place under the constraint of diminishing returns.
An illustration. Let us create a small manufacturing plant producing some standardized product. The plant itself represents a
fixed "bundle" of land, capital, and management. To this fixed
input of resources is added successive units of the variable resource,
labor. The resulting outputs are shown in column 2 of Table 9-2.
The increase in output (marginal product) per unit increase in
man power is shown in column 3. The output per man or average
product is shown in column 4.
It can be seen that total output increases at an increasing rate
through the point at which two men are employed. Beyond this
point, output continues to increase but at a diminishing rate. This
point, where two workers are hired and the total output is 12 units,
is the point of diminishing marginal product, or diminishing reTABLE 9-2
DIMINISHING RETURNS ILLUSTRATED

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

No. of
Workers

Output
per Day

Marginal
Product

Average
Product

0

0

0

5
1

5

5

7
2

12

6
6

3

18

6

5
4

5.75

23
3

5

5.20

26
1

6

27

4.50
-2

7

25

3.57

101
SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION
turns. The point at which three men are hired and the total output
is 18 is the point of diminishing average product.
The point of diminishing marginal product should not be confused with the point of diminishing total product. It may pay this
firm to hire three, four, five, or even six workers; it would never
pay this firm to hire a seventh worker inasmuch as he would make
a negative contribution to total output. So long as an extra worker
makes a positive contribution to total output (so long as marginal
product is positive rather than negative), it may pay the firm to
hire the extra worker. In other words, the point of diminishing returns does not necessarily define the optimum rate of use of the
variable resource. As a matter of fact, we shall find that the optimum rate of use of the variable factor usually lies beyond the point
of diminishing returns but short of the point of diminishing total
output.
Graphic presentation of the law of nonproportional outputs. The

data in Table 9-2 are shown graphically in the accompanying diagram (Fig. 9-1). The graph pictures the relationship between the

2

3

4

Number of workers

5

MP

FIG. 9-1

output of the firm and the number of units of labor (the variable
input) employed by the firm. The workers are assumed to be of
equal quality and to be used in conjunction with a fixed plant, i.e.,
in conjunction with a given-sized "bundle" of land, capital, and
management.
Inspection of the graph shows that the total output of the firm

102

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

(TP) increases as the amount of labor hired increases, until the
addition of a seventh worker causes total output to decrease. It
will be further noted that the use of, first, one and, then, two workers causes total output to increase at an increasing rate, i.e., the
increase in output is more than in proportion to the increase in
the number of workers hired. This stage in the expansion of output
(often called the stage of increasing returns) is identified as Stage
I in Fig. 9-1. During this stage all three measures of output—total,
marginal, and average—are increasing.
In Stage II total output and average output continue to increase,
but marginal product is decreasing. In other words, with this Stage
the firm encounters diminishing marginal returns. Total output is
still increasing but at a diminishing rate, i.e., the increase in output
is less than proportionate to the increase in the variable input, labor.
In Stage III total output continues to increase, but now both marginal and average product are decreasing. The firm is encountering
diminishing marginal and diminishing average returns as measured
against the additional workers hired.
In Stage IV all three measures of output are decreasing. Clearly
no firm would deliberately and voluntarily push its hiring of labor
into Stage IV. Where, then, should the firm stop? What number
of men should it employ? No precise answers can be given to these
questions on the basis of the data presented here. We would have
to know what the firm would have to pay in the way of wages for
each additional worker hired and what it could expect to earn from
the sale of the additional output. Lacking these data, all we can
say is that the firm will try to balance extra revenues against extra
costs in trying to determine the right-sized labor force.
We can say, of course, that the firm will get the most out of its
labor, i.e., obtain the highest average product, if it hires three workers. But this does not help us. What the firm wants to do is
get the most out of a combination of labor and the land, capital,
and management which represent the fixed input. Only if these
other resources were free goods would it be best for the firm to
stop with the hiring of the third man. To get the most out of the
combination of all of the resources used, the firm will normally be
compelled to operate with a labor force and total output that places
it somewhere in Stage III. This will become more obvious as we
turn to the discussion of cost in the next chapter.
We selected labor as the variable resource in our illustration.
This does not mean that labor is always the variable resource, and
that land, capital, and management are always the fixed resources.

SUPPLY: THE LAWS OF PRODUCTION

103

On the contrary, labor may be taken as the fixed resource, and land,
capital, or management (or some combination of the three) may
be taken as the variable input. The law holds whatever the variable
and whatever the fixed resources.
Management and the Law of Diminishing Returns. We have

recognized management as a special kind of labor, so special that
it is separated as a resource class, coordinate with labor, land, and
capital. If we treat management as the fixed and indivisible factor,
and labor, land, and capital as variable factors, we find that the
analysis of diminishing returns answers some very important questions. Why do the firms in some industries grow to such a size that
only a few firms (or even just one firm) are needed to supply the
total output? Why is even the largest firm in other industries still
so small relative to the total market that it produces but a fraction of one percent of the total output?
If we treat management as the fixed and indivisible factor, we
find that as more land, capital, and labor are gathered together
under the direction of one man, output can be increased at first
more than in proportion to the increase in the size of the "plant,"
then less than in proportion, and finally a stage is reached beyond
which output actually declines. There are limits to what one man
or one group of men can do. Even under an exceptionally able
businessman, operations can get "too big." He is simply unable to
make the innumerable decisions that have to be made promptly
and wisely, and, what is no less important, he is unable to see to
it that his decisions get executed with vigor and effectiveness. Improvements in the techniques of business organization and administration have pushed back the stage of diminishing returns to size
of plant but have not eliminated diminishing returns as a restraint
on the growth of the firm.
The stage of diminishing returns sets in much later under very
able business executives than under mediocre ones. However, as
more and more resources are placed under the control of the able
executive, a stage is reached where additional resources could be
better used by a mediocre but less-burdened executive. Here is
probably the most important single reason why a single firm in an
industry rarely absorbs all its competitors.
It should be recognized that technological and other forces may
"overpower" this factor and produce industries in which one or a
few firms supply the entire output. Whether the consumer is better or less well served under such an arrangement is a question
which we shall attempt to answer in a later chapter.

104

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

Questions:
1. Define "opportunity costs"; give three examples, and explain how the
market translates opportunity costs into dollars and cents costs.
2. Define the term capital and state just what Robinson Crusoe had to
do to increase his supply of capital. If we exclude the possibility of
borrowing from other societies, can a modern complex society increase its supply of capital in any other way?
3. "In some cases American grants to industrially underdeveloped countries to help them improve their productive capital appear to have
been wasted (in the sense that they were very much less useful than
they might have been), because the investment decisions were determined by engineering rather than economic considerations." Can you
cite from knowledge or from general reasoning the kind of faulty
decisions suggested by this statement?
4. "The extraordinary technological progress of the last 100 years shows
that the so-called law of diminishing returns is a myth invented by
reactionary economists to deter governments from taxing the wealthy
to help the poor."
(a) State the law of diminishing returns; (b) defend or rebut the
proposition that it is a myth; (c) if you regard it as a reality, illustrate its usefulness as a tool of economic analysis; and (d) indicate
with supporting reasons whether there is any truth in the charge
that acceptance of the reality of the "law" is likely to influence one's
attitude toward income redistribution through taxation.
5. Argue for or against the correctness of the following statements:
(a) "The prospects of maintaining competition in a private enterprise society would be nil if the law of diminishing returns were not
a reality."
(b) "The law of diminishing returns demonstrates that a society's
resources will be used to the best advantage in the sense that output
per capita will be maximized, if each firm employs labor up to and
not beyond the point at which the marginal product of labor is at its
maximum."

10
Supply: Costs of Production

I N THE preceding chapter we described certain relationships between the input of resources and
the output of goods and services, summarized in the law of nonproportional outputs. This, the physical side of production, can
be translated into money costs of production by assigning prices
to the resources used. In this chapter, we shall take the production
schedule developed in the preceding chapter and, by assigning
prices to the resources used, transform it into a schedule showing
the cost of producing each of the outputs. In the next chapter we
shall take the final step of combining cost factors and demand and
showing how these determine the responses of the firms to the calls
of consumers.
SUPPLY OF RESOURCES TO THE FIRM
The prices our firm must pay for resources will be determined
by the market demands for and supplies of those resources. Because, by assumption, our firm is but one of many buyers of resources, it can purchase as many or as few units of each type of
resource as it wishes without changing the "going" price for that
type of resource. If the going rate for experienced punch-press
operators is $2.30 an hour, that is the price our firm will pay for its
punch-press operators, whether it hires two or twenty. In the technical language of economics, the supply curve of a given type of
resource facing the competitive firm is a straight line parallel to
the X-axis at the level of the market price for the resource.
We are not concerned here with the total complex of forces that
determines the price of each type of labor, of each type of capital,
of each type of land. We are concerned only with the fact that the
competitive firm, acting alone, can buy few or many of these resources without producing a finite change in their prices.
105

106

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION
SHORT-RUN COSTS

We are now ready to assign prices to resources and thus transform production data into cost data. Before we do so it would be
well to identify the nature of the cost pattern to be described.
The firm under study has already committed itself to a plant of a
given size, that is, to a fixed "bundle" of resources in the form of
land, buildings, machinery, top management, etc. This bundle
represents the fixed input of the firm, in the sense that it will remain unchanged throughout this section of our investigation into
costs. The variable input is labor and the added raw materials with
which each laborer must be supplied. The question we will be asking is this: "What will it cost this firm to produce various quantities
of output when it is free to vary only the amount of labor and raw
materials used with its fixed plant?"
The answer to this question will be a schedule of costs that may
be identified as the short-run cost schedule of the firm. The shortrun is defined as a period of time long enough to permit the firm
to vary its rate of use of some but not all resources. The long-run
is defined as a period of time long enough to permit the firm to
vary its rate of use of all resources. We shall turn to the long-run
cost schedule of the firm in the second part of this chapter.
Thefirm'scosts. In the short-run, the firm employs a combination of fixed and variable inputs; corresponding to these types of
inputs are two types of costs: overhead or fixed costs and variable
costs. Total overhead costs do not vary with output; total variable
costs do. Total overhead cost per time period is the sum of the
costs of the fixed inputs—the land, buildings, machinery, top management, etc.
Particular attention should be given to the fact that the economist
includes a payment to management as part of the overhead cost
of the firm. This payment includes more than just the salaries of
the top executives. In a modern corporation it includes a payment
to the common stockholders, the basic decision-making group in
the corporation, equal to what they could have earned had they
put their resources into the best alternative uses. The accountant
does not treat payments to common stockholders or returns to partners and proprietors on their equity capital as part of the "costs" of
the firm; the economist does. The logic of the economist's position
(in terms of his purposes) will be made clear when "profits" and
"losses" are defined in the next chapter.
Total variable cost is equal to the sum of the expenditures per

SUPPLY: COSTS OF PRODUCTION

107

time period on variable inputs, such as labor and raw materials.
Total cost is the sum of total fixed and total variable costs. Fixed,
variable, and total costs may be expressed as totals or as costs per
unit of output. The average fixed cost at a given rate of output is
equal to total fixed cost divided by the output. Average variable
cost at a given rate of output is equal to total variable cost at that
output divided by output. Average total cost at a given rate of
output is equal to the sum of the average fixed and average variable
costs at that output; or it can be found by dividing total cost by the
output.
Of particular interest to the economist is marginal cost. Marginal
cost is the additional cost of producing one more unit of output.
The marginal cost between any two outputs can be fc-und by dividing the increase in total cost (or total variable cost, since
changes in total cost can come only through changes in total variable cost) by the increase in output. (The mathematical symbol A
is used to indicate an increment or addition; thus, ATC should
be read as "the increase in total cost/') Obviously, if the increase
in output is one unit, marginal cost can be measured directly by
the increase in total cost or total variable cost.
The abbreviations, TVC, TFC, TC, AFC, AVC, ATC, and MC,
are frequently used to represent respectively, total variable cost,
total fixed cost, total cost, average fixed cost, average variable cost,
average total cost, and marginal cost.
An illustration. Table 10-1 presents the short-run cost pattern of
the firm whose production data were given in Table 9-2 of the
preceding chapter. Labor and the added raw materials with which
each laborer must be supplied are assumed to be the only variable
input used and are assigned a price of $10 a day. The total fixed
costs are assumed to be $50 a day. All of the other costs can be
developed from these figures and from the production data, in the
manner indicated in the heading of each column.
Thus at a rate of output of 18 units per day, total variable cost
is $30 (the daily wage of 3 workers). Total cost at this output is
$80 ($30 of variable costs plus $50 of fixed cost). Average variable
cost at this output is obtained by dividing total variable cost (30)
by the rate of output (18), which yields $1.67. Similarly the average fixed cost of $2.78 is obtained by dividing total fixed cost ($50)
by the output (18). The average total cost of $4.45 is the sum of
variable cost ($1.67) and average fixed cost ($2.78). This same
figure (give or take a penny, because of rounding errors) can be
obtained by dividing total cost ($80) by output (18). Marginal

108

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION
co.

oO,-

co

o

0 0 C<1
0

00

"^

O5

00

O

01

IO

^

co

co

TP

§2

8S

cq

3 §

g

g

g

S

TJH

oq

d

!>;
rH

C5
rH

C<|
Cq

8

8

S

in

in

in

o

co

in

«

o

t-

in

vo

in

co

cq

co

co

co

rH

rH

<M

C\|

co

in

co

SUPPLY: COSTS OF PRODUCTION

109

cost at a rate of output of 18 is found by dividing the $10 increase
in total cost ($80 — $70) by the increase in output (18 —• 12) of 6.
It can be observed that average fixed cost decreases as output is
increased; this is the familiar result of "spreading the overhead over
more units." Average variable cost first decreases and then increases as output is increased. These stages in average variable
cost correspond to the stages of first increasing, then decreasing,
average product. Average variable cost is at a minimum where
average product is at a maximum. In other words, at that rate of
output where the firm is getting the most out of its variable resources, its variable costs are the lowest.
Average total cost also decreases and then increases as output
is increased from zero. In the early stages, both average fixed and
average variable cost are decreasing. Hence, average total cost
must fall. When average variable cost starts increasing (as the law
of diminishing returns, or variable proportions, tells us it must), the
resulting upward pull on average total cost is at first more than
offset by the continued decrease in average fixed cost. Eventually,
however, the upward pull of increasing average variable cost overcomes the downward pull of decreasing average fixed cost and average total cost begins to increase.
Marginal cost can be seen to decrease and then increase as output is increased from zero. It reaches its minimum at that rate of
output where marginal product is a maximum. In other words, the
greater the addition to total output resulting from the use of one
more man, the less the extra or marginal cost of producing an added
unit.
Graphic presentation. Cost data, like demand data, can be presented graphically. Figure 10-1 presents the four short-run cost
curves as they would appear if taken from a more complete cost
schedule than the one presented in Table 10-1.
The curves give a visual picture of the way a firm's costs per unit
of product change with every change in its output. The AFC curve
falls throughout. (It has the shape of a rectangular hyperbola.)
The AVC curve depicts the effects of variations of output on average variable costs. It shows that this average falls for a time and
then begins to rise. The upper curve, marked ATC on the diagram,
is the average total unit cost curve. Lv is the low point on the AVC
curve; Lt is the corresponding point on the ATC curve. Lt necessarily lies to the right of Lv since average fixed costs are still falling
more rapidly than average variable costs are rising in the range of

110

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

output involved. At output Lt the downward pull of average fixed
costs are exactly offset by the upward pull of rising variable costs.
It will be noted that the marginal cost curve cuts both the average variable cost and the average total cost curves at their lowest
points. This is not just coincidence. So long as marginal cost is less
than either of these costs, it exerts a downward pull on the average;
so long as marginal cost is greater than either of these costs, it exerts
an upward pull on the average. Consequently marginal cost must
be equal to average variable cost where average variable cost is at
a minimum, and must be equal to average total cost where it is at
a minimum. We shall find that these relationships are of more than
geometric importance.
MC

Costs
in
dollars

AFC
0

Output per time period

FIG. 10-1

Cost curves plotted from actual operating data (if such were
available) would not necessarily display the same eye-pleasing symmetry of the curves in Fig. 10-1. For example, it is entirely possible
that the average variable, average total, and marginal cost curves
would all be "flat-bottomed" curves, that is, would show little
change in the level of cost over a wide range of intermediate outputs. However, the curves would still bear the same relationship
to one another as that pictured in Fig. 10-1.
LONG-RUN COSTS
Up to this point, we have permitted the firm to vary only its rate
of use of labor and raw materials, not the size of its plant. Because
this is a limitation facing actual firms in most of their day-to-day
decisions, our findings will be of great assistance to us in explaining
behavior in an enterprise economy.
However, when given time to make changes, firms may decide
to increase or reduce the size of their plants. Also, at the planning

SUPPLY: COSTS OF PRODUCTION

111

stage, before capital is committed to plant and equipment, the manager of the firm is free to select the size of plant he wishes. This is
a very important decision. It may affect the profitability of the firm
for many years to come. What considerations should guide the
manager? His decision is most likely to be correct if he works out
with his engineers and accountants estimates of the fixed and variable cost schedules for plants of various sizes. For each plant size
there will be a lowest ATC figure. For the manager of a firm operating in a purely competitive market, the only proper decision is to
settle on the plant size that yields the lowest ATC, since by definition he can sell his entire output at market price, regardless of the
size of plant.1
A graphic illustration. The curves shown in Fig. 10-2 may help
visualize the problem of determining the proper size of plant.
Costs
in
dollars

Output per time period
FIG.

10-2

The curves designated ATCU ATC2 . . . ATC5 show how average
total costs will vary from very small to very large outputs for plants
of five different sizes. The ATCX plant has the smallest amount of
capital tied up in land, buildings, machinery, etc.; the ATC5 plant
has the largest amount. An examination of the five curves shows
that the larger the plant, the longer the range of output over which
the firm will encounter increasing returns on its variable costs, and
the larger the output at which ATC will be at a minimum. The
important consideration, however, is not the size of the output at
which ATC will be at a minimum; rather it is the size of the plant
1
For the management of a firm operating in a noncompetitive market the decision
is more complicated. As wall be shown later, account must also be taken of the effect
of plant size and output on market price. In this chapter the analysis is based on
the assumption that the firms are operating under conditions of pure competition.

112

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

which yields the lowest possible minimum ATC. In this particular
case it is the ATCS plant size that yields this result. This is said to
be the optimum-sized plant for this particular management. When
a plant of optimum size is operating at the scale at which its ATC
is at its minimum, the plant is said to be operating at normal capacity. OQ3 represents the normal capacity of the ATC3 plant and
QSC3 is its long-run normal cost of production. We shall show in
the next chapter how competition tends to force all purely competitive firms to operate at normal capacity. But we shall also show
why, in the short-run, it may be more profitable for a firm to operate
at less or at more than normal capacity.
Does this mean that the optimum size of all firms in a given industry will be of the same size? The answer is, "no." The appropriate size of plant for a less efficient management will be smaller than
for a more efficient management. Will the larger and more efficiently managed firms drive out the smaller and less efficiently managed firms? Here the answer is, "probably not." And the reason for
this is that the firms that command managements of exceptional
ability have to pay for these abilities in the form of higher salaries
and managerial earnings. We shall have more to say about these
managerial earnings in the discussion of wages in Chapter 15. Here
it suffices to point out that economic theory explains what experience shows to be true: that firms of very different physical sizes can
compete indefinitely against one another in the same market, without the big ones having any marked advantage over their smaller
rivals. More of the output will be produced by the bigger and more
efficiently managedfirms—justas the consumer would wish—but the
smaller, less efficiently managed firms will continue to operate.
Return to scale of plant. Inspection of the curves in Fig. 10-2
shows that the minimum ATC first decreases and then increases as
the size of plant is increased. Thus C2 is closer to the X-axis than
Ci, and C3 is still closer; but beyond C3 the minimum ATC's begin
to rise. If we connect these points, Cl9 C2, C3, C4, C5, we get what
is known as a firm's long-run cost schedule, or its planning curve.
It declines, reaches a minimum, and then rises. The first stage is
described as the stage of increasing returns to scale of plant. The
second stage is described as the stage of decreasing returns to scale
of plant. If minimum ATC were constant through a range of plant
sizes, the situation would be described as one of constant returns to
scale of plant.
The explanation for increasing returns to scale of plant is usually
found in technological factors, the larger plants being able to use

SUPPLY: COSTS OF PRODUCTION

113

more efficient machines and techniques than the smaller plants. In
the modern steel industry, a very small plant would be forced to use
very primitive techniques for processing ore and for its other operations, and its unit costs of production would be correspondingly
high.
The explanation of decreasing returns to scale is usually found in
the management factors referred to on p. 103. As the plant grows
larger, it eventually reaches a size where increased technical efficiencies are more than offset by losses in the efficiency with which
the unit can be managed. It is these management factors that
eventually place a ceiling on the growth of the firm.
Constant returns to scale are usually found in a range of plant
sizes where technological gains from increased size are just balanced by losses in management efficiency. As the plant size is increased beyond this range, diminishing returns to scale of plant are
usually encountered.
Significance of returns to scale. Some of the most important
questions in economic policy are related to returns to scale. For
example, what if the optimum-sized plant in a given industry is a
plant of enormous size? Doesn't this destroy the possibility of competitive behavior?
The answer to this question is, "not necessarily." If the market
is very large (perhaps, a world-wide market), even the very large
firm may be small relative to the market in which it operates. (This
is one of the reasons that economists consistently press for a widening of markets through a lowering of tariffs and other barriers to
world trade.) Also, as we shall see, the rivalry among a number of
large firms, a rivalry that takes many forms, may provide the consumer with more goods at lower cost than would be true if the
product were produced by a great number of small firms.
But if the large firm is in a position to exploit the consumer, what
then? Can it be broken up without a great sacrifice of technical
efficiency? The answer here depends in part on a careful distinction
between "plant" and "firm." The large firm possessed of almost
monopoly power may be just a collection of a great number of
plants, each of approximately optimum size. It may be that the
firm could be broken up into a number of firms, each controlling
one operating unit, without any great sacrifice of technical efficiency.
However, we would do well to delay a final answer to this question until we have completed our survey of market behavior. Without pressing the topic further at this time, it should be clear that

114

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

the concept of returns to scale is one of considerable practical
significance.
Questions:
1. Distinguish between fixed costs and variable costs as the terms are
used by economists and identify expense items which the economist
would include and the accountant would exclude from fixed costs.
2. Define marginal cost; indicate at what point the marginal cost curve
cuts the average variable cost curve and the average total cost curve
and why it must cut them at these points.
3. Explain why the economist regards as particularly significant the behavior of marginal costs.
4. Define the terms "optimum size" and "normal capacity" and state
which of the following costs will be at a minimum when a firm of
optimum size is operating at normal capacity: ATC; AVC; AFC; MC.
5. Argue for or against the correctness (from a strictly economic point
of view) of each of the following propositions:
(a) "The management of a plant of optimum size should always
operate at normal capacity if it is to maximize the profits of the
owners."
(b) "The private enterprise system would serve the public better if
the managers of all the firms continuously adjusted their production schedules so that their average costs (which include a reasonable return on investment) just equaled market price."
(c) "In view of the fact that practically every industry is made up
of firms of very different sizes it is obvious nonsense for economists to
say that all of the firms may nonetheless have the same average total
costs."

11
Demand and Supply Under
Competition:
Concepts of Equilibrium

JLHE purpose of this chapter is to
show how firms react to market prices that are higher or lower than
their minimum average total costs, and how these reactions tend to
bring resources into the uses desired by consumers. These reactions
are motivated by the desire for profits and the fear of losses. The
first step is to define the terms "profits" and "losses," as they will be
used in the analysis to follow.

PROFITS AND LOSSES

During an accounting period a firm realizes revenues from the
sale of output and incurs costs associated with the production of the
output. The difference may be positive, or negative, or zero. If
positive, it represents profits; if negative, losses. If the total revenues just equal the total costs, the firm realizes neither profits nor
losses.
It is important to note here that the economist does not use these
terms in the same sense as does the accountant or the businessman.
The economist includes in total costs a return to management equal
to what the management resources could have earned in the best
alternative use. Thus profits, as defined here, represent a return to
management over and above what is needed to keep the management resources in the industry. Losses represent a return to management below what is needed to keep the management resources
in the industry.
To illustrate: suppose that the total revenues of a firm are $100,115

116

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

000 a year and its total costs, exclusive of a return to management,
are $80,000. The accountant would report a profit of $20,000. The
economist would first ask what the management resources could
have earned in the best alternative use open to them. If this was
$15,000, the economist would add this to the $80,000 of costs, as
reported by the accountant, and say that the profits were only
$5,000. If, on the other hand, the management resources could
have earned $30,000 in the best alternative use, the economist
would say that the firm's total costs for the year were $110,000, and
that the firm had suffered a loss of $10,000, and not the $20,000
profit reported by the accountant.
In the preceding paragraphs the phrase "management resources"
has been used several times. Involved are the salaries the management might have earned in the best alternative uses, and the interest the management might have received on its own capital had the
capital been invested outside the firm.
The justification for this "unorthodox" way of defining profits and
losses is that it provides a means of predicting the direction of
movement of firms and resources simply by identifying the lines of
industry where profits are being made and those where losses are
being taken. The movement of firms (and of resources) is determined by the relative profitability of different lines of production.
Profits as defined by the accountant provide a very imperfect clue
to relative profitability; profits and losses, as defined by the economist, are direct measures of relative profitability.
ADJUSTMENT AND TIME
Firms react to profits and losses, but these reactions take time.
The reactions follow a general sequence which can be divided into
three rather definite stages for purposes of analysis. These three
stages are identified in terms of the type and the extent of the reactions which are possible in each stage. The first is called the
instant-of-time or the immediate-run period. It is a period of time
too short to permit the firm to alter its production schedule. The
reaction of the firm is limited to changing the amount of already
produced goods which it will place on the market.
The second is called the short-run period. It is a period of time
long enough to permit the firm to change its rate of use of some but
not of all of its resources. The reaction of the firm can take the form
of increasing or reducing output by hiring more or less labor and
buying more or less raw materials. The adjustment cannot take the

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

117

form of increasing or decreasing the size of the plant or of changing
from one line of production to another.
The third is called the long-run period. It is a period of time long
enough to permit the firm to vary its rate of use of all resources.
The reaction of the firm can take the form of changing from one
line of production to another, or of increasing or decreasing the size
of its plant, or of moving its operations from one place to another.
The actual length of each of these time periods varies from firm
to firm and from industry to industry. The time required to bring
new firms into the corner shoe-shine industry is very short, a matter
of days. It takes more than $30,000,000 and close to two years to
build a continuous strip rolling mill in the steel industry.
When each firm in a given industry has completed all of the adjustments possible in any one of the three stages, the firms and the
industry are said to be in equilibrium for that stage. This concept
permits us to identify three types of equilibrium for a given industry: immediate-run equilibrium, short-run equilibrium, and
long-run equilibrium. Finally we shall identify a situation in which
all of the firms in all of the industries are in long-run equilibrium,
a situation to be known as general equilibrium.
THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS IN THE IMMEDIATE-RUN

By definition the immediate-run is a period too short to permit
firms to alter their production schedules. The quantity of output
per time period is a constant; the only freedom left to the firms is
the freedom of withholding some or all of the output from the
market—and even this freedom is very limited if the product is
highly perishable or if the firms are desperately short of cash.
In effect we are concerned here with the forces that determine
the market price of goods already produced. Costs have been incurred, but they lie in the past. Consequently they cannot be determining. In the immediate-run period, market demand is the force
to be watched.
The analysis in this section will be made first on the assumption
that the firms place all of a stock of previously produced goods on
the market for whatever price it will bring; and then on the more
realistic assumption that at least some of the firms will withhold
part of their stocks in anticipation of a better price in the near
future.
Completely inelastic supply. If the firms will put all of their existing outputs on the market regardless of price, the situation can
be described as one of completely inelastic supply; that is, suppliers

118

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

are completely insensitive to price changes. The supply curve for
the product will be a straight line perpendicular to the X-axis at
the fixed quantity being produced.
The only requirement for equilibrium in this case is that the price
clear the market, that is, that the price be such that the quantity
demanded be equal to the quantity supplied. Thus in Fig. 11-1
D
Price
in
the equilibrium price would be
dollars
OP. At the higher price, OF, the
quantity offered for sale, the fixed
stock, OQ, exceeds the quantity
—^
P demanded, OQ', by the amount
P"Q'Q. This surplus of unsold goods
—
will press on the market and bring
the price down to OP. At a lower
price, OP'\ the opposite happens.
Q Q
The quantity available, 0 0 , is less
^ • '. . ?
than
the quantity demanded, OQ .
Quantity per time period
FIG. 11-1
The unsatisfied buyers who are
willing to pay more than OP" will
bid the price up to OP. Only at the price OP is the market cleared;
this is the price that will come to prevail in a purely competitive
market in which suppliers prefer to sell at any price rather than
hold output off the market.
Some applications. The foregoing analysis demonstrates that a
shortage or a surplus of a given commodity can be created by the
simple act of fixing a price that is either below or above the equilibrium or market-clearing price. The shortage of consumer goods
during World War II, as the term "shortage" is used in economics,
resulted from the price control program which set the prices of
most goods below the prices that would have cleared the markets.
For each commodity there were more buyers than sellers and the
goods had to be "rationed." The advantages and the disadvantages
of physical or formula rationing as against free price rationing will
be discussed later.
The high minimum prices guaranteed various farm products under our present federal farm program have created surpluses which
the Federal Government has had to buy and dispose of at a loss.
This method of aiding the farmer will be examined in some detail
in a later chapter. Here it suffices to note that "shortages" and "surpluses" cannot exist in competitive markets. Prices, being free to

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

119

move, will be brought to whatever level is necessary to clear the
market.
Reservation prices. Even in the immediate-run period most firms
have a limit, or reservation price, below which they will not release
additional units from their inventories of goods on hand. A small
farmer, for example, may prefer to let his family eat all the eggs
laid by his chickens, if the market price goes below a certain figure.
As the price rises he will sell more and more and allow fewer to
appear on his table. A manufacturer of shoes may behave in much
the same way despite the fact that he himself has no use for the
shoes. Only in his case he will be influenced by (a) his need for
funds and (b) his judgment as to the future price of shoes. If he is
convinced that future prices will be higher than present prices, and
if he can afford to wait, he may refuse to sell any shoes whatever;
if he continues to produce it will be "for inventory." If, on the other
hand, he has pressing liabilities and lacks cash he may reduce his
normal inventory by selling more shoes than he currently produces
until his immediate need for cash has been met. After this only a
rise in market price will induce him to sell. In general, if future
prices are expected to be lower than present prices a firm's reservation price will tend to approach zero; conversely, the expectation
of higher prices raises reservation prices.
The concept of a rising series of subjective valuations (reservation prices) at which a firm will be induced to part with larger and
larger portions of a stock of goods already produced but not yet
sold necessitates a slight revision of our concept of supply as being
absolutely fixed in the immediate present. Complete fixity p ^ w
S
of supply implies a zero reser- dollars
vation price. This is seldom
met with in the real world.
Even though the physical supplies of commodities are fixed
at any given instant of time,
the amount that will be offered for sale depends on the
prices buyers are willing to offer and the reservation prices
of the suppliers.
The diagram (Fig. 11-2) proQuantity per time period
vides a better picture of reality
FIG. 11-2

120

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

than does Fig. 11-2. As before, the quantity of goods in the
hands of sellers (Qo) is fixed, but the amount which they will release depends on price. Consequently the supply curve is not a
line rising vertically from Qo but rather a curve which slopes upward and to the right from 0. Each point on the curve shows the
quantity that would be released at a specified price. The market
price will be determined by the point at which the demand curve
intersects this supply curve. It is the price Pr and not the price Po.
The lower price would prevail only in the event that all the sellers
had zero reservation prices.
Profits and losses in immediate-run equilibrium. It is apparent
that even in this time period the market price of a commodity depends upon demand and supply, and not upon demand alone. But
it is also apparent that it is not the past costs of producing commodities that determine their prices, except as these past costs influence the reservation prices of the firms.
The price which clears the market in the immediate-run period
may be well above the average total costs of the firms in the industry. In this case the firms will make profits. But it may also be
well below the minimum average total costs of the firms. It may be
so low that the firms cannot even recover their variable (out-ofpocket) expenses. In either of these two events the firms will have
to take losses.
Neither profits nor losses can influence the behavior of the firms
in the immediate-run period, because, by definition, they do not
have time to make adjustments in the scale of their operations, to
say nothing of the size of their plants. We turn next to the adjustments that firms can make in the short-run when they do have time
to complete limited reactions to the profit-and-loss situations confronting them.
THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS IN THE SHORT-RUN
In the short-run period a firm cannot change the size of its plant
and fixed equipment, but it can alter its scale of operations. It can
operate at less than or more than "normal capacity." The question
which confronts the management is this: Given the market price
and given present plant and equipment, at what rate of output will
profits be maximized or losses minimized?
Common sense would indicate that the firm should produce an
extra unit of output per time period, if that unit adds more to the
revenues of the firm than it adds to the costs of the firm. In the
same way the firm should reduce output if the last unit produced

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

121

adds less to revenues than it does to cost. From this it follows that
if the last unit produced adds neither more nor less to total revenues than it does to total costs, the firm should leave output unchanged.
The firm that has so adjusted its output is said to be in short-run
equilibrium. In the technical language of economics the firm has
settled upon the scale of output at which marginal cost equals marginal revenue. This is simply a short way of saying that in the
short-run a firm will maximize its profits or minimize its losses, if
it produces up to the point at which the addition to total cost as a
result of producing one more unit equals the addition to total revenue as a result of selling one more unit. This test for determining
the short-run equilibrium position of the firm holds true whether
the firm is selling in a purely competitive market or in any one
of the market situations characterized in Chapter 6 as "noncompetitive."
In purely competitive markets marginal revenue equals market
price. It follows that for firms operating in such markets, and only
for such firms, the short-run equilibrium position is realized when
marginal cost equals market price.
It is important to note that a firm that is in short-run equilibrium
is not necessarily covering all of its costs. If the price is below
minimum average total cost it will be losing money. Nevertheless
it will pay the firm to continue operating at this scale if the price
covers its out-of-pocket or variable expenses. If the price will not
cover variable expenses, the firm will lose less by closing down than
by continuing to operate. This relationship between marginal cost
and marginal revenue provides us with what we shall call "the
equilibrium rule."
The equilibrium rule illustrated. The data in Table 10-1 represent the costs confronting a firm with a given plant. The total fixed
costs of the firm are $15 a day. If the market price is $11.00, the
equilibrium rule indicates that the firm should operate at the rate
of 10 units of output per day, the rate of output at which marginal
cost is also $11.00.
The profit or loss position of the firm at this output is measured
by the difference between total revenue $110 ($11 X 10) and the
total cost ($101.00). The firm is making a profit of $9.00 a day.
A few computations would prove that, given a price of $11.00 and
given the firm's cost schedule, $9.00 is the largest profit figure attainable.
If the market price were $9.00, the equilibrium rule shows that

122

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

the firm should operate at 8 units of output per day, the rate of
output at which marginal cost is also $9.00, despite the fact that it
would be losing $8.00 a day, the difference between total costs of
$80 and total revenue of $72.00. However, it would lose $15.00 a
day (the total of its fixed costs), if it shut down. Hence, it would
pay the firm to continue operating in the short-run. A few computations will again prove the validity of the equilibrium rule: given
a market price of $9.00, and given the cost schedule of the firm,
$8.00 a day is the lowest loss figure attainable.
If the market price were to fall to $7.00, it can be demonstrated
that the firm would lose less money by closing down than by operating. This is because $7.00 is below the firm's lowest possible
average variable cost figure. There is no rate of output at which
$7.00 will even cover the firm's out-of-pocket expenses. For example, if the firm were to produce 6 units a day it would cover its
marginal cost, but it would lose $21.00 a day. By closing down it
can cut its loss to $15.00 a day.
At a market price of $10.00, the firm should produce 9 units a
day. Total revenue in this case would be $10.00 X 9 or $90.00; total
TABLE

11-1

SHORT-RUN COSTS

Day

Total
Cost

Total
Variable
Cost

Average
Variable
Cost

Average
Total
Cost

3

$45.00

$30.00

$10.00

$15.00

4

50.00

35.00

8.75

12.50

5

56.00

41.00

8.20

11.20

6

'63.00

48.00

8.00

10.50

7

71.00

56.00

8.00

10.14

8

80.00

65.00

8.13

10.00

9

90.00

75.00

8.33

10.10

10

101.00

86.00

8.60

Output per

Marginal
Cost
$6.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
11.00

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

123

costs would also be $90.00. Profits and losses would be zero. This
is the firm's long-run equilibrium position, given its existing cost
schedule; an output of 9 units per day is its normal capacity at this
scale.
Short-run equilibrium of the industry. As all of the firms in a

given industry proceed with their short-run adjustments the output
of the industry will change. The industry output will increase if the
firms are expanding outputs and will decrease if the firms are decreasing outputs. These changes in the output of the industry will
cause the market price to change. It will fall if the industry output
is expanding, and will rise if the industry output is decreasing.
Eventually, however, the adjustments in market price and in the
outputs of the firms will bring the industry to its short-run equilibrium position. The market price will just clear the market of
goods and each firm will be operating at that rate of output where
marginal cost is equal to market price. The firms in the industry
will then have answered the call of the consumers as well as it is
possible for them to do so within the limits of their fixed plants.
But the responses will still be incomplete. If the firms are making
profits in the short-run, it is a sign that consumers are calling for
more "fixed" resources in the industry—for more buildings, machinery, etc., to be used in the production of the commodity. If the
firms are taking losses in the short-run, it is a sign that consumers
want some of the "fixed" resources transferred to other uses.
THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS IN THE LONG-RUN
The adjustments undertaken by firms in the long-run can best be
understood in terms of the definitions of profits and losses. Profits
represent a return to management resources over and above what
is needed to keep them in the industry. Losses indicate that the
return to management resources is less than what would be needed
to keep them in the industry.
The function of the more-than-adequate returns, or profits, is to
"lure" more resources into the industry. The transfer of resources
takes the form of new firms entering the industry and of existing
firms expanding their plants (if they are not already of optimum
size). During the long-run adjustment period, resources continue
to flow into the industry so long as they can earn more in this industry than in others—and the existence of profits in the industry
is proof that such is the case.
The function of losses is to "drive" resources out of the industry.
The transfer of resources takes the form of firms leaving the in-

124

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

dustry or reducing the size of their plants (if they are beyond their
optimum size). Resources continue to flow out of the industry so
long as they can earn more in other uses—and the existence of losses
in the industry is proof that such is the case.
The entry of new firms into a profitable industry leads to an expansion of output. This, in turn, leads to a fall in price. As the
price comes down, profits shrink and eventually disappear. The
exit of firms from an unprofitable industry leads to a reduced output. This, in turn, leads to an increase in price. As the price rises,
losses shrink and eventually disappear. In other words, profits and
losses disappear once they have accomplished their purpose of inducing firms to follow the wishes of consumers.
Long-run equilibrium. The directives of consumers have been
followed to the letter once the industry has reached long-run equilibrium. Long-run equilibrium for a given industry is a situation in
which each plant has attained its optimum size and is operating at
normal capacity; the market price just clears the market and just
covers the minimum average total costs of the firms in the industry.
Once this position has been reached, there no longer exists any incentive for new firms to enter the industry or for existing firms to
leave. Consumer satisfactions would be reduced if either more or
fewer resources were employed in the industry.
The adjustment process illustrated graphically. The process by
which an industry reaches this long-run equilibrium position is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 11-3.
Price

INDUSTRY
D
\ V

P,

Price

FIRM
MC
f

ATC

y /I
/

p

i

P

2

•d2

I
I
I

\D
0
Q,Q2
Output per time period

I
I
i

Output per time period
FIG.

11-3

The solid Sx curve in the diagram on the left is the industry supply curve. It is based on a given number of firms in the industry
and on a given cost pattern confronting each firm. It tells us how
many units the industry as a whole will supply at each of various

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

125

prices after the firms have completed their short-run adjustments
to that price. In other words, it is the short-run supply curve of
the industry. The upward slope of the curve reflects the fact that
thefirmsmaking up the industry cannot increase their outputs without running into rising marginal costs. If consumers want more
outputs from these firms they must pay enough to cover the rising
marginal costs.
The downward sloping D curve represents the market demand
for the product. The prevailing market price is OP^ it equates the
quantity supplied and the quantity demanded, that is, it clears the
market. The number of units exchanged is OQlt
The diagram on the right (Fig. 11-3) shows us the situation confronting a typical firm in the industry. The horizontal straight line
dx represents the demand curve confronting the firm; since we assume pure competition, it is drawn at the level of the market price.
The output of the firm is oqly the output at which price is equal to
marginal cost. At this output the price is greater than the average
total cost; hence, the firm is making profits, as are the other firms in
the industry. The existence of profits establishes the fact that this
is a short-run equilibrium and not a long-run equilibrium situation.
These profits cannot provoke any further expansion of output
from the existing firms, since the firms are already operating where
price is equal to marginal cost. Consumers must look for relief to
the entry of new firms into the industry. (To simplify the exposition we shall assume that each firm has attained its optimum size;
hence, adjustments can come only through the entry of new firms.)
As new firms enter the industry, attracted by its profitability, the
industry supply increases. At any given price, more is now offered
for sale than before. These continuing increases in supply would be
represented graphically by a series of new short-run supply curves,
each lying further to the right of the original curve (S^ than the
one before it.
Each increase in supply, demand remaining the same, lowers the
price. Eventually, when the supply has increased to the level represented by the supply curve, S2, the price will have dropped to the
level where it just covers the minimum average total costs of the
typical firm. The demand facing the firm is now the d2 line, and
the output of the firm is oq2.
The industry is now in long-run equilibrium. The profit signal
is stilled. Firms outside the industry are no longer attracted to it,
yet the firms in the industry are covering all of their costs, including
a return to management adequate to keep the management re-

126

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

sources in the industry. Given no intrusion of outside forces, this
represents a stable and unchanging position.
This demonstration could be repeated for the long-run adjustments of an industry that is unprofitable in the short-run. The original market price would be below rather than above minimum
average total cost for the typical firm. In the long-run adjustment
period, firms would leave rather than enter the industry; the industry short-run supply curve would move to the left rather than
to the right; the price would rise rather than fall. The loss signal
would eventually be stilled and the industry would be in long-run
equilibrium.
INCREASING-, CONSTANT-, AND DECREASING-COST
INDUSTRIES
In the foregoing illustration of an expanding industry, the industry was able to expand output without changes in the basic cost
pattern. In other words, the entry of new firms apparently had
no effect on the costs confronting the typical firm. An industry of
this type, where the costs of the typical firm are unaffected by
changes in the number of firms in the industry, is said to be a
constant-cost industry.
We might have selected for illustration an industry in which increased outputs could have been supplied only at increased costs.
The entry of new firms into such an industry puts upward pressure
on the prices of some or all of the resources used, with the result
that the costs of the typical firm rise as the industry expands. This
is known as an increasing-cost industry. This would be true of industries using resources largely "specialized" to the industry, in the
way that coal deposits are specialized to the coal mining industry.
Or we might have selected an industry in which increased outputs could have been supplied at decreasing costs. The entry of
new firms into such an industry results in lower prices for some or
all of the resources used, with the result that the costs of the typical
firm fall as the industry expands. This is known as a decreasing-cost
industry. This situation can exist only under unique circumstances.
It requires that the firms in the industry be buying resources from
a firm or firms still operating in the decreasing cost sections of their
average total cost schedules.
An application. This analysis of industry costs can be put to various uses. For example, the so-called "infant industry" argument for
tariffs is based in part on the decreasing cost situation. The argument runs as follows: If larger industry outputs can be produced at

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

127

lower cost than can smaller outputs, the "infant" industry in one
country will never be able to grow if it must compete with firms
in countries where the industry has already reached the largeoutput, low-cost position. A tariff will shield the infant from the
competition of foreign firms, permitting it to grow until it too is in
the large-output, low-cost position. The tariff can then be removed
and the domestic firms will be able to meet the competition of foreign firms. We shall return to this discussion in a later chapter.
GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

In examining the adjustment process in a single industry we have
taken no account of the complex interrelationships among the industries of a modern economy. Obviously, actions taken in industry
A are influenced by and have an influence on actions taken in industry B, industry C, and so on. No one industry can reach final
long-run equilibrium until all have reached long-run equilibrium.
When each firm and each industry has reached this position, and
when each individual is also in equilibrium as a consumer and as a resource owner, the economy as a whole is in general equilibrium.
The significance of the equilibrium concept. The equilibrium

concept provides the economist with a description of the tendencies
at work in a market economy. The word "tendencies" is used in
recognition of the fact that the conditions necessary for an economy
actually to reach and remain at the general equilibrium position are
never realized in full in economic life. Those conditions are: (1)
pure competition in all markets; (2) no changes in consumer
demands; (3) no changes in population; (4) no changes in technology; (5) no changes in the general level of prices; (6) no disturbances from the actions of government; and (7) no disturbances
from other economies.
Given these seven conditions, the economic units of the country
could work out their interrelated adjustments and arrive eventually
at a position of general equilibrium. Obviously, not even one of
these conditions is likely to be completely realized at a given moment of time. For example, neither consumer demands nor technology "stand still" for any length of time in a dynamic society such
as ours. Before an industry has adjusted to one demand and technology pattern, it finds that it must change its course to meet the
requirements of a new pattern.
In real life, the industry dog never catches the equilibrium hare.
However, the equilibrium analysis provides the economist with a

128

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

description of the chase. The dogs in a race never catch the mechanical hare; however, the behavior of the dogs can be understood
only by knowing why they are trying to catch the hare and how.
The behavior of the firms, consumers, and resource owners in a
market economy can be understood only by knowing why and how
they are trying to catch what. It is this kind of knowledge which
the economist gains through his study of equilibrium.
THE PATTERN OF THE ANALYSIS TO FOLLOW

The next step we shall take will be to examine the distribution of
rewards in a market economy under the same demanding conditions as those imposed on the analysis of this chapter. Then we
shall relax those conditions, one by one, to determine how a market
economy functions in the imperfect and changing world of reality,
and to discover how (and if) we must modify the conclusions that
logically follow from this analysis.
First, we shall drop the assumption of universal and pure competition and examine the performance of markets under conditions
that are not purely competitive. Next, we shall allow for the fact
that economic processes are carried on in a large number of politically independent but economically interdependent societies in
which populations are growing at very different rates, in which
technologies are at very different levels, and in which social attitudes toward change are very different. We shall take account of
the fact that governments do intervene in economic life in a wide
variety of ways, some helpful to the performance of an enterprise
economy and others not so helpful or positively detrimental.
Thereafter we shall study the complications that arise out of the
use of money, both at the national and international levels, with
particular reference to the problems of inflation and deflation, of
prosperity and depression. This will be followed by an analysis of
selected problems in economic life, largely to illustrate the wray in
which the tools of the economist can be used to outline the issues
in economic policy.
Finally we shall examine alternatives to the enterprise system,
with a view to discovering how well each of the alternative systems
may be expected to serve the ends of a liberal, democratic society.
Questions:
1. State and illustrate the difference between the economist's and the
accountant's use of the term "profit."

DEMAND AND SUPPLY UNDER COMPETITION

129

2. The legal requirements for reporting business earnings for federal
income tax purposes tend to exaggerate the profit component in the
national income. Explain.
3. Indicate with supporting reasons the correctness or the incorrectness
of the following statements:
(a) "It is not the actual and hence past costs of producing a commodity that determine its market price."
(b) "There can be no such thing as surpluses (in the sense of goods
that cannot be sold) in purely competitive markets."
(c) "To say that the cost of production determines the exchange
value of a good (i.e., its price) is quite different from saying that
the forces of supply and demand result in an exchange value which,
in the long run, tends to be equal to cost of production."
(d) "Most economists who believe in the superiority of a competitive
market economy over alternative forms of economic organization
recognize that there are circumstances which justify, on strictly economic grounds, the imposition of tariff duties on imports."
4. Resource owners in industries that are losing money frequently seek
subsidies and other aids from government. Discuss the effects of such
aids on (a) the total output of goods and services; (b) the real incomes of resource owners taken as a whole; (c) the interest of consumers.

12
Distribution: Profits and Rent

A HE functions of an economic organization were described earlier as those of deciding what is to be
produced and in what amounts, of allocating resources among the
various tasks to be performed, and of dividing the output among
the people in the society. We have now seen how the first two
functions are handled under the enterprise system. We turn now
to a study of how the output gets divided among resource owners.
This topic is studied under the heading of "distribution."
MEANING OF THE TERM "DISTRIBUTION"
The term "distribution" is used in three distinct ways. In the
business world the word is used to describe the physical movement
of goods from factories to final consumers, via wholesalers and retailers. These last two are known as the distributive trades. In the
national accounts, to be described later in Appendix A, the income
generated through trade is treated as separate and distinct from
that generated through manufacturing and the extractive industries.
To the economic theorist, however, these firms are just as much
producers as are the others. They are involved in the creation of
utilities of one sort or another and what they produce is just as
important to consumers as are the material things provided by the
extractive and manufacturing industries. In brief, the businessman
uses the term distribution to describe only one aspect of production.
The word is also used to describe the sharing of the social output
among individuals, as individuals, regardless of the contributions
they may have made toward the creation of the output. When the
economist uses the term "distribution" in this sense he usually precedes it with the adjective "personal." We shall see presently that
the pricing process distributes rewards to individuals in a very un130

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

131

equal fashion. As a consequence a democratic people may not be
satisfied with the results, even if it can be shown that the distribution is functionally correct.
In economic theory the word "distribution" is used in the functional sense. Distribution is concerned with explaining how the
forces of supply and demand put prices on the factors of production
—land, labor, capital and entrepreneurship. Unless otherwise indicated the term will be used in this sense throughout the remainder of this book.
The problem to be solved. The problem confronting us centers
around this question: What is the relationship of the market prices
of the things consumers buy to the money incomes which they earn
as resource owners? Do consumer incomes determine market
prices, or do market prices determine consumer incomes? The final
answer to these questions must wait upon the removal of the assumptions governing the present discussion. For the time being we
assume that all consumers are active participants in production, and
that they bring to the productive processes all of the resources under their control. We assume, in other words, that resource owners
have zero reservation prices when it comes to marketing their resources. With a view to simplifying the problem all resources are
grouped under four headings: land, labor, capital, and entrepreneurship. We also continue to assume that the economy under observation is isolated from all other economies, that there is neither
growth nor change once the economy has reached its long-run equilibrium position, that money plays a neutral role, and that all firms
operate under the conditions of pure competition described in
Chapter 6, p. 68.
Given these assumptions, it is obvious that the money value of
the claims of the resource owners, which take the form of wages,
interest, rents, and profits, must equal the money value of the goods
and services produced by the firms; and conversely, that the money
value of the goods and services must be equal to the four claims.
But how are the total claims divided among the resource owners?
Is the sharing determined by arbitrary and capricious forces, group
pressures for example, or is it the logical result of competitive
market forces?
PERSONAL INCOME INEQUALITIES

But before we undertake to explain in any detail how competitive market forces tend to distribute the social output "functionally,"
something needs to be said regarding the present personal distri-

132

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

bution of the output and the causes of the great inequalities which
the facts reveal.
The facts. Table 12-1 shows the share of the nation's total money
income going to each one-tenth of the nation's "spending units" in
1948 and 1950. A spending unit is defined as a household consisting of a single person or a number of persons whose incomes are
regarded as pooled. The incomes of some households may be much
larger than that of others simply because it is made up of a number
of income receivers.
TABLE 12-1
SHARE OF TOTAL MONEY INCOME RECEIVED BY EACH TENTH OF THE
NATION'S SPENDING UNITS, BY SIZE OF INCOME: 1948 AND 1950

Spending Units
Ranked from
Low to High

Lowest tenth
Second tenth
Third tenth
Fourth tenth
Fifth tenth
Sixth tenth
Seventh tenth
Eighth tenth
Ninth tenth
Highest tenth

Percent of Total Money Income
Before Federal Income Tax
(By Tenths)
1948

1950

1
3
5
6
8
9
10
12
15
31

1
3
5
6
8
9
11
13
15
29

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1952, Table 311.

There was little change in these two years. The incomes received
by the richest households in both periods were roughly 30 times as
great as those received by the poorest households.
Another picture of personal income inequalities is shown in the
following table which ranks the spending units from low to high
by wage brackets.
Both tables reveal the fact that the national income in the United
States is distributed very unequally. We shall have occasion in later
chapters to consider to what extent this particular distribution is
due to the operating requirements of the private enterprise system,

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

133

TABLE 12-2
DISTRIBUTION OF CONSUMER UNITS BY SIZE OF
FAMILY PERSONAL INCOME IN 1950

Percent Distribution of
Family Personal Income
(before income tax)
Under $1,000
$1,000-1,999
$2,000-2,999
$3,000-3,999
$4,000-4,999
$5,000-5,999
$6,000-6,999
$7,000-7,999
$8,000-8,999
$9,000-9,999
$10,000 and over
Total

Families and
Unattached
Individuals

Family
Personal
Income

7.6
15.1
16.5
17.4
14.4
9.2
6.0
4.2
2.5

0.9
5.1
9.3
13.6
14.4
11.3

1.5
5.6
100.0

8.7
7.0
4.7
3.1
21.9
100.0

Source: Income Distribution in the United States. Supplement to the Survey of
Current Business. United States Dept. of Commerce, Office of Business Economics,
Washington: 1953, Table 24.

and to what extent to interferences with its operations which needlessly increase the inequalities.
Before considering the forces that would lead us to expect that
the income would be distributed unequally in a market economy,
it should be pointed out that the data in the preceding tables may
exaggerate slightly the actual inequalities. In the first place there
are more single and two-person households in the two lowest groups
than in the higher ones—young persons who are living alone, old
people on pension, and young couples without dependents. In the
second place, the family incomes at the bottom of the scale are
heavily weighted by the very low money incomes of a large number
of farmers on marginal land. These families secure an important
part of their real incomes from produce raised on their farms. This
income in kind is not fully counted. Offsetting this "exaggeration"
bias is one running in the other direction. More of the families in
the higher income groups own their own homes. The rental value
of these homes—what they would have to pay if they were renters
instead of owners—represents a real but unrecorded income.

134

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

But after all qualifications are allowed for, the fact remains that
the national income of the United States is very unevenly distributed.
The causes. There are a number of what may be called basic
causes for these inequalities and a still larger number of subsidiary
causes.
1. Differences in abilities. In a society in which wages are based
on the importance of the contributions which the wage earner
makes to the social output, individual differences in rewards are
bound to be considerable. The personal qualities which are useful
in producing the many things consumers want are distributed very
unevenly among the working population. The services of those embodying scarce combinations of qualities have to be rationed. In
general they go to the firms that outbid all the others. These individuals are in a strong bargaining position since the option is
frequently open to them to go into business for themselves.
2. The institution of private property. Wage differentials of this
sort would be present in a society in which all young people started
from scratch, i.e., with no savings or with equal amounts of savings.
Actually the very high incomes of the families making up the richest 10 percent of the spending units are a combination of high wage
incomes and incomes derived from the ownership of land and
capital. The land and capital may or may not have been acquired
out of the previous savings of these particular households. In any
event, once the process of saving and acquiring productive property
starts, further accumulation becomes progressively easier.
3. Inheritance or the right of bequest. One can conceive of a
society based on private property and private enterprise in which
the State imposed no limits on the amount of income and property
individuals were permitted to acquire but prohibited completely
the right of bequest. The State would be the universal inheritor of
the unspent accumulations of each generation. What effect this arrangement would have on voluntary accumulation does not concern
us here. What does concern us is the fact that the right of bequest
means that all young people do not start from scratch. A few start
with comfortable incomes from property acquired by preceding
generations. Since these fortunate individuals are presumably at
least as able as those who must start from scratch, it is easier for
them to save and accumulate. The result is that the right of bequest
introduces a further and powerful force making for increasingly
large personal income inequalities.
4. Miscellaneous factors. In addition to these three basic causes

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

135

of large personal inqualities there are many minor causes. There
are, for example, the environmental factors. Children of well-to-do
families have opportunities for a better education than do the children of poor families. Their parents are also more likely to realize
the importance of education for economic as well as for cultural
reasons. The children tend to know the right people and hence be
given the chance to start with more responsible and better paying
jobs than children of equal abilities who lack the connections and
have had to come up the hard way. Moreover, the children of the
poor are more likely to be burdened with dependent parents and
near relatives. On the whole, the children of the well-to-do marry
later; this renders them more mobile, more able to experiment and
shift around, until they find the kind of work for which they are
best suited. Hence they are less likely to get stuck in blind alley
jobs. Monopolies of various sorts tend to increase income inequalities. Finally, just plain luck counts, although, in general, it is the
able who know how to exploit their luck.
Mitigating factors. It must also be remembered that there are
forces in a competitive market economy which tend to reduce income inequalities and others which tend to render more tolerable
those which appear to be inherent in a private enterprise economy.
Unusually high rewards in any job or profession induce young people to qualify themselves for these tasks and to offer their services.
In so far as the barriers to entry are not due to insurmountable innate differences in individuals, the high rewards are brought down
and low rewards are brought up. Similarly high rewards to capital
in any field attract new firms together with the material and human
resources required to produce the goods and services that are in
short supply. Competition is constantly seeking to equalize the
earnings of firms and hence the earnings of the human beings who
provide the various services the firms require.
Saving and accumulation in themselves do not produce income.
They must be put to use. In a competitive economy this always involves the chance of loss. Hence a part of a people's savings are
always being destroyed by bad investment decisions or by changes
in production techniques or consumer preferences. Whatever the
form of social organization these losses must be borne by people.
They are part of the price that must be paid for economic progress.
In so far as these losses involve property they are borne by those
who own property. In a society in which all capital goods are
publicly owned, they would be borne by all the people as citizens.
Furthermore most of the saving and accumulating in a private

136

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

enterprise society is done by the small minority with very large
incomes. The difference between the consumer spending of the
richest tenth of the spending units and the poorest tenth is not as
great as the difference between their net money incomes before
taxes. If the incomes at the top were reduced and those at the
bottom were increased by compulsory income transfers until all
personal incomes were equal, and if the State then took from these
incomes as much as now goes for the maintenance and accumulation of capital and the support of government, the increase in the
incomes at the bottom would be inconsiderable.
Even this small improvement would only be forthcoming if the
redistribution had no adverse effects upon personal incentives. If
it did, and there are strong reasons for believing that it would, the
real incomes of all the people, including those who are now at the
bottom of the income pyramid, would be less a generation hence
than they are at present. This way of looking at the matter suggests
that the gross personal inequalities which appear so unwarranted
when viewed in the perspective of the immediate present may be
responsible for the fact that the real incomes of the lowest 10 percent of the population in the United States have improved so dramatically over the past 100 years, despite the enormous growth of
total population.
Concluding remarks. Despite the fact that a strong case can be
made for income inequalities as a prerequisite for material progress
and for the betterment of the children of those who now get the
smallest part of the social output, there can be no denying the fact
that these existing inequalities arouse strong personal resentments.
Those who believe that the institutions of private property and
private enterprise are essential to the effective utilization of a nation's human and material resources and to the production over
time of a larger and larger social output should not close their eyes
to the existence of these resentments. They can easily lead a government which is responsive to the popular will to undertake a
redistribution of personal incomes so drastic as to destroy the effectiveness of the market economy itself. If, as many social scientists
believe, the maintenance of democratic institutions depends on the
maintenance of a competitive market economy—a thesis which we
shall consider in a later chapter—we face a dilemma of serious import. Here we take no position on this issue. We merely wish the
reader to have the fact of inequality before him when we come to
examine public policy issues in later chapters. We shall see the

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

137

effects of the democratic bias in favor of equalization in all of the
interventions to be studied in these chapters.
We return now to an examination of the way in which competitive forces tend to distribute the social output among resource
owners, i.e., the problem of the functional distribution of the national income.
THE MARGINAL PRODUCTIVITY PRINCIPLE

OF DISTRIBUTION
Under the enterprise system, claims to goods and services are
distributed to resource owners as part of the same process in which
resources are allocated to the various tasks to be performed. Just
as this process results in prices being placed on goods and services,
so also it results in prices being placed on the resources used in
producing those goods and services.
In general, the price placed on each unit of each type of resource
is determined by the productivity of that unit, that is, by the contribution which it makes to the production of goods and services.
We have called this contribution the marginal product of the unit;
hence, this method of distributing rewards is often referred to as
distribution on the basis of marginal productivity. This distribution
scheme can be summarized as follows: "The more your resources
produce, the more you get."
It is not the function of the economist to appraise the ethics of
this distribution scheme. It is his function to point out that if the
people of a country wish to use an enterprise system they must be
willing to permit rewards in the first instance to flow to resource
owners on this basis. This does not preclude the possibility of the
state forcing a secondary redistribution of rewards through its
power to tax and spend. But one very important question in economic policy is how far the state can go in redistributing income
before the incentive system is so weakened as to make it inoperative.
We shall trace the operation of the marginal productivity principle as it is reflected in the wages, interest, rent, and profits
received by laborers, savers, landlords, and entrepreneurs.
PROFITS

The first claim to be examined is that of the relatively small group
of individuals responsible for bringing together the land, labor, and
capital and making the decisions as to what shall be produced and

138

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

as to the methods of production, i.e., the entrepreneurs. Their reward is known as profits.
Profits a transitional income. Given the assumptions under which
we are here working, the analysis of profits can be disposed of in
short order. They represent an important but transitional income
which disappears as soon as it has served its purpose of bringing
the economy into the position of long-run equilibrium. Thereafter
growth, change, and uncertainty disappear and with them this particular claim on the social product. There are no net savings, no
capital accumulation, no population growth, no technological innovations, no monopolies, no rigidities, no pressure groups, no governments, and hence no governmental interferences, and only one
great market, every crack and corner of which basks in the brilliant
sunshine of pure competition. In such an economy there can be no
such thing as profits as a permanent phenomenon. They emerge
whenever some outside force, like a drought or an earthquake,
throws the economy momentarily off the dead center of general
equilibrium; they disappear as soon as they have accomplished their
function of restoring the economy to its general equilibrium position. When the economy is in this latter position, the costs incurred
by firms consist entirely of wages, interest, and rents; the incomes
which the consumers bring to the market consist entirely of these
same wages, interest, and rents. There are no profits.
This does not mean that the managers work for nothing. They
are paid, frequently very well paid, but the explanation of the
forces determining their rewards is part and parcel of the explanation of the forces determining the rates of wages for workers of
various sorts, and will be discussed in that connection. When the
managers are also the owners of the firms, they get in addition interest on their capital and rent for the use of their lands. The personal incomes of many individuals in this unreal world, as in the
actual world, will be made up of all three elements, wages, interest,
and rent, but they are analytically distinct.
We propose now to show that wages, interest, and rent are necessary and permanent components of the national income in the kind
of a society we are now analyzing and that they are determined by
the same processes that determine the prices of the goods and services produced by the firms. We shall start with rent.
A warning. When we come to the use of the theory here being
developed as a guide to policy making, we shall have to recognize
that in the real world saving, investing, capital accumulation, and
capital consumption are all in the picture. Further, we shall be con-

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

139

fronted with a confusing admixture of competition and monopoly,
of knowledge and of ignorance, of rule-of-thumb production techniques, and of rapid technological change. We shall also have to
recognize the existence of many independent nations growing in
wealth and in numbers at very different rates and each with an independent credit and banking system, a fluctuating price level, and
a network of interventions which complicate economic decisions.
In brief we shall have to recognize that those who undertake the
entrepreneurial function are exposed to great risks which require
at least the hope of exceptional rewards as an offset to losses.
Thus, in the real world there will always be profits and losses in
so far as the price mechanism is allowed to work. The functions of
these profits (and losses) will be much the same as in this artificial
model of an economy during the period in which it is approaching
general equilibrium, viz: to provide incentives; to direct production
in accordance with the wishes of consumers; to equalize the rewards going to the other factors; and in the process and as a result
of shifts in the use of resources, to destroy profits and losses alike.
As a matter of fact the net profit component in the national income
in the real world is really quite small. And yet it is the most important of the factoral incomes. Destroy it by punitive legislation
or discredit it through misrepresentation, and the whole private
enterprise system collapses.
The importance of profits does not mean that entrepreneurs
should be guaranteed profits or even protected against losses. If
entrepreneurs are protected by the state against losses, resources
will not be driven out of the uses where they are unwanted. Entrepreneurs in a competitive market must not be denied the possibility
of profits nor should they be protected against losses. These are the
signals on which the efficiency of an enterprise system depends.
Looked at in this way, our approval should not go to the businessman who is losing money, but rather to the one who is making
money. The former is keeping scarce resources from their most
effective use, and the latter is thereby being prevented from putting
them to their most effective use, to the detriment of all of us. This
does not mean that the unsuccessful businessman as an individual
does not deserve our sympathy, but in so far as we approve of public measures to help him we should approve of such measures as
will help him become more efficient or find an outlet for himself
and his resources more appropriate to his capacities.

140

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION
RENT

In economics the term "rent" refers exclusively to the portion of
the social product that goes to the owners of natural resources by
virtue of their legal titles of ownership. For brevity all of these
natural resources are lumped together and treated as "land." The
term thus includes not only land in the ordinary sense of the word,
but also rivers, lakes, forests, mines, etc.; in brief, everything which
is provided by nature in contrast with the buildings, tools, and
equipment which man uses in the cultivation and utilization of
land. These man-made things are capital, not land.
The businessman, however, makes no such distinction. He regards both as capital. To him interest and rent are both rewards
derived from the use of capital. When he uses the term "rent," he
refers to the payment for the use of a durable good, but he always
equates it with interest by the process of expressing it as a percentage of the valuation he places on the thing "rented." Thus, if
he values a residential property at $10,000 and he gets $1,000 a year
from a tenant, the businessman will say that he is making $1,000 a
year in rent, or 10 percent gross interest on his investment.
The economists who distinguish between land and capital do so
because they believe that there are significant differences between
the two, and that failure to recognize these differences is conducive
to unwise policy decisions on the part of individuals and the
State.
Land versus capital. Land differs from man-made durable economic goods in four respects. The four words origin, mobility, durability, and variability suggest the nature of these differences.
Origin. First of all, there is the difference in origin. Land as
space is a gift of nature. Capital is man-made; it results from the
application of labor and waiting, or saving, to land.
Mobility. A second difference is with respect to mobility. Land
must be used where it is. Most capital goods can be moved from
place to place. Hence they tend to gravitate toward the places
where the market mechanism puts the highest valuation on them.
This distinction is not always clear cut. Buildings and certain types
of improvements like drainage ditches, dams, bridges, etc., are immovable once they become attached to the land. This leads the
lawyer to refer to durable combinations of this sort as real estate.
The economist also recognizes that this marriage (without possibility of divorce) creates a new situation, and, as we shall see pres-

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

141

ently, he uses the term quasi-rent to explain, among other things,
the magnitude of the short-run return to capital goods.1
Durability. A third difference is with respect to durability. In
general land is much more durable than the concrete capital goods.
The average economic life of the vast accumulation of capital goods
in the United States may not be much more than 15 years. Again,
however, the difference is only one of degree. It is most pronounced in the case of land regarded simply as space. Land, as the
foundation on which to build, is practically indestructible. But
some buildings are serviceable for generations, even centuries.
Land, as the top 12 to 18 inches from which grains, vegetables,
grasses, and trees draw almost their entire nourishment, is highly
destructible.
Top soils can be washed or blown away (eroded), or its organic
and mineral content can be dissolved and drawn down out of reach
of plant life (leached) in a relatively few years, unless great care
is exercised in its use. It can also be rebuilt by careful husbandry.
Hence it can be said of all soils, as of all capital goods, that their
maintenance requires saving. Saving means here that the owners
must refrain from practices that yield the largest gross revenues
over the short-run, if they are to maintain the fertility of the land.
Nevertheless, land, taken as a whole, is much more durable than
capital, taken as a whole.
Both, however, are destructible. This means that a very substantial amount of manpower in a wealthy country must be devoted
year in and year out just to keeping the existing stock intact. In a
private-enterprise economy the primary responsibility for doing this
is left to the self-interest of the individual.
Variability. A final difference has to do with the persistent variability or lack of uniformity in the total supply of land in economic
use. In the case of capital goods, their relatively short economic
lives leads to the permanent retirement of inferior types. As a
particular capital good wears out it will be replaced by one that
embodies the best existing technological knowledge. Given the
assumptions under which we are now operating, all concrete capital
goods of a given type would be of equal excellence; they would
differ from one another only with respect to age. Different plots of
land, however, would differ from one another enormously in their
productivity, and yet there would be no tendency for superior lands
to displace inferior lands. It follows that consumers must always
1
Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, 8th ed., Macmillan & Co., Ltd., London,
p. 74.

142

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

look to lands of different excellence for the satisfaction of their
wants.
At any given time there will always be some land in existence
that is so deficient in natural fertility or so arid or so swampy or so
rugged or so remote from markets as to make it questionable
whether it should be used at all. Such land is said to be marginal.
Lands that are clearly worth keeping in cultivation are referred to
as intramarginal, while those that clearly should not be in cultivation are spoken of as submarginal.
In a growing society with an evolving technology, submarginal
lands may in time become marginal or intramarginal. Science may
change worthless land overnight into a veritable gold mine. But in
our static society of pure competition submarginal lands remain
permanently submarginal and are, therefore, of no further concern
to us.
In the remainder of this chapter and in the next chapter we shall
discuss the income from land under the following headings: (a)
the measurement of rent; (b) the conversion of rents into land
values; (c) the functions of rent; and (d) the problem of vested
rights.
THE MEASUREMENT OF RENT
Site rent. We shall start by considering the forces determining
the rent of farm lands. With a view to simplifying the problem it
will be assumed that the individuals making up the work force are
all equal in their abilities; that the farm workers are entirely engaged in growing corn; and that the acres under cultivation are of
equal excellence in all respects but one, and that is nearness to
market. Let us imagine that the corn farms are distributed in concentric zones around the market town in which all the corn not
consumed by the farm families must be marketed. Within each
zone the cost of moving a bushel of wheat to market is the same,
but the cost of transportation increases as we move from the closest
to the more distant zones. The situation may be illustrated diagrammatically as shown in Fig. 12-1. Let A be the market town
and let the points on the horizontal straight line running through A
and marked 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 represent the limits of zones of equal
transportation costs.
The step-like curve, with the rises at the zone limits, represents
the cost of bringing a bushel of wheat to A from the farms in the
several zones. The height of the curve along the Y-axis in each

143

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

zone measures the transportation cost per bushel for all bushels
originating in the zone.
Given these conditions, what is the relationship of the price prevailing in the central market town to the cost of production on the
farms in the several zones?
THE ZONES

5

4

3

2

1 1 2
FIG.

12-1

The answer is that, if the people in the town want corn so badly
that farmers in Zone III, for example, must be induced to contribute
to the supply, they will have to pay enough to cover average total
unit costs of all farmers in Zone III when these farmers are operating their farms at the point where these costs are a minimum.
The price per bushel that will satisfy a farmer in Zone III will just
cover the interest and amortization charges on his machinery and
equipment; the cost of seed and fertilizer; wages for hired help plus
the wage he might earn if he worked for another; the going rate of
return for the exercise of the managerial function; and finally the
transportation charge. We can represent this long-run equilibrium
cost position of a typical Zone III farmer as follows:
Dollar*

MC

ATC

w

FIG. 12-2

In the long-run, consumers in the town (A) must be prepared to
pay OPB (Fig. 12-2) for the corn from Zone III (which is equal to
O 3 r 3 + TBP3, where OT3 equals the transportation charge per

144

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

bushel and TSP3 equals the minimum average total unit cost of
production).
But what will the farmers in Zones I and II do as demand gradually forces the market price up to the OP3 level? Is it in the general
interest that they sell for just enough to cover their average total
unit costs when these are at a minimum, plus their own special
transportation costs? If they do, the delivered price of corn to the
town (at A) will vary according to point of origin. The resulting
price differences could not persist. Competition would promptly
raise the price to the level necessary to compensate Zone III farmers, and the corn dealers in A would pocket the money that would
otherwise have gone to the Zones I and II farmers. This solution
would not be in the general interest. It is better for consumers that
the money should go to the farmers because it will induce them to
grow more corn. This will prevent the price of corn from rising as
high as it would have risen if the farmers in Zones I and II had not
been guided by the desire to maximize their money incomes.
The appropriate behavior of a Zone I farmer can be seen by reference to Fig. 12-3. He should push cultivation beyond Si5 at which
Dollars

Arc

Zone I

point his average total unit cost is a minimum, to S3, at which point
his marginal cost plus his transportation cost per bushel are exactly
the same as the minimum average total unit cost of a Zone III
farmer plus his transportation cost per bushel.
Fertility rent. Now let us assume that the farms are all equidistant from market (i.e., that there are no locational advantages), but
that the lands under cultivation fall into three fertility classes (Fig.
12-4). Given this assumption it follows that a given amount of
labor and capital applied to Grade I land will result in a greater
physical output than if applied to Grade II land; and that the same
holds true for labor and capital applied to Grade II land in com-

145

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

parison with Grade III land. It further follows that Grade II land
will not be put into cultivation until it becomes profitable to cultivate the Grade I lands so intensively that the marginal costs on
these lands equal or exceed minimum average total unit costs on
Grade II lands. After all Grade II lands have been brought into
use, a further rise in price will bring into cultivation Grade III
lands, and lead to the more intensive cultivation of Grade I and
Grade II lands. At any given time marginal cost on the superior
lands will just equal the minimum average total unit costs on the
land which is just worth cultivating (marginal land) and these
costs will just equal market price.
Dollars

ATC

Grade I

Grade II

Grade HI

FIG. 12-4

The gross revenues realized by the farmers of Grade III lands
are just enough to cover wages and interest. There is nothing left
over which can be "imputed" to the land. On the better lands there
is a substantial surplus left over which is the result of the difference
between output times price and output times average cost. This is
rent.
Marginal land. We are now in a position to define the term
marginal land. Marginal land is land so distant from the market
(or so inferior in fertility) that the revenues of the firms making
use of this land are just sufficient to provide the going rates of
return to the labor, capital, and management used in production.
The Zone III lands in the site and fertility illustrations are marginal. The net returns the farmers get are just sufficient to cover
their expenses—wages, interest on their investment in equipment,
etc., and their own entrepreneurial wages. There is no surplus to be
imputed to the land as such. Hence we refer to the Zone III lands
as "no-rent" or marginal lands. They can only be cultivated extensively. The lands in Zone IV are submarginal. Until the price of
corn rises to the level that will justify bringing these lands into production, landless workers and savers can get better returns by as-

146

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

sociating themselves with Zones I and II farmers than they can by
taking up Zone IV land, even though these lands are to be had for
the asking.
The gross earnings of the Zones I and II farmers are such that
they could pay more for the labor and capital used in their operations than could the Zone III farmers. But competition cannot
compel them to do so, and if they did so for reasons of sentiment
or under compulsion, an anomolous situation would result. Workers of comparable skill and of comparable moral worth would get
different rates of pay, depending on whether they worked for
Zone I, Zone II, or Zone III farmers. Similarly, savers would get
different rates of interest, depending on the location of the borrowers. It is obvious that the only individuals who have a better
claim to the surplus incomes from the Zone I and Zone II farms
than the owners of those farms are the consumers taken as a whole,
i.e., the community. This was the conclusion reached by Henry
George in his eloquent plea for the Single Tax.2 We shall consider
his proposal further in the section on vested rights.
RENTS AS MARGINAL PRODUCTS

In the analysis of rents up to this point, the relationship between rents and the marginal productivity principle has not been
developed explicitly. This relationship can be made explicit in the
following way: Let us suppose that an acre of the Zone I land described on p. 144 were to be taken out of cultivation and that the
labor and capital thus released were to be redistributed over the
remaining land. Because this labor and capital would have to be
applied to land already being worked in the range of diminishing
returns, the loss of an acre of Zone I land would result in a shrinkage of the total output of corn. It can be demonstrated that the
value of this corn loss would be equal to the rent on an acre of
Zone I land as computed by the method described on p. 145.
In the same way, it can be demonstrated that taking an acre of
the marginal or Zone III land out of cultivation would result in no
shrinkage of the total corn crop. It will be recalled that marginal
land is zero-rent land. In other words, the rent of an acre of land
in a competitive market is equal to the value of the contribution
which it makes to total output.
2
Henry George, Progress and Poverty; An Inquiry into the Cause of Industrial Depressions and of Increase of Want with Increase of Wealth; the Remedy (1880). This book
has been translated into many languages and has gone through innumerable editions.

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

147

THE CONVERSION OF RENTS INTO LAND VALUES
Capitalization: static conditions. We now want to know how

land rent gets converted into a market price for the land. The explanation requires that the rate of interest be regarded as already
determined. If that is so, then the market value of an acre of land
is simply the present value of all the future surpluses or rents. In
a static society with an unchanging technology and an unchanging
price level, these surpluses will continue indefinitely into the future
and will be exactly the same in dollar value as the surplus presently
being realized. The present value of an infinite number of constant dollar payments is obtained by dividing the constant dollar
payment (the rent) by the rate of interest. The algebraic formula
is V = a/r, with V representing the present value of the infinite
series, a representing the annual rent, and r representing the rate
of interest. This is known as the principle of capitalization. This
principle is applicable to any claim to a definite sum to be paid at
definite intervals over a future period of time. The formula applies,
however, only to an infinite series and is applicable, therefore,
only to land and on the assumption that it is indestructible.
If an acre of Zone I land yields an annual rent of $10 and the
rate of interest is 5 percent, its selling value will be $200. The assumption here is that throughout the indefinite future the farmerowner will use the going standard of entrepreneurial judgment;
that he will get from his own labor and from hired labor the going
output per hour and pay the going wage; that he will pay the going
rate for capital; and that his method of cultivation will preserve
the natural excellencies of the land.
A digression on the dynamics of capitalization. In the real world
the conversion of rents into values is not so simple. Future expenses and future prices of farm products are both uncertain. In
general, farmers and farm buyers appear to be influenced in their
judgments of the future by the happenings of the fairly recent
past. If rents have been rising for some time, there is a tendency
for sellers to assume that they will continue to rise in the future.
Buyers will tend to take a somewhat less optimistic view of the
situation. Out of the bids and offers will come a meeting of minds
that will yield a market price that exceeds considerably that obtained by the static formula V = a/r. The formula V = (a/r) +
(i/r2) appears to provide a better short-hand expression of the effect of these optimistic expectations on present market values. In
this formula the value to be given to i is the average increase in

148

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

economic rent per year to be expected on the basis of the average
increase over the recent past, say the last 7 to 10 years.3
Thus if the economic rent of a piece of land has been increasing
at the rate of 25 cents a year for some years and is now $10.00 per
year, its selling price will come closer to conforming with the dynamic than with the static formula. The static formula gives a
market value of $200,000 whereas the dynamic formula yields a
market value of $300.00. What this formula tells us is that a person cannot buy land that is expected to yield a series of rising rents
and at the same time get an immediate return in the form of rent
that will represent the going rate of interest. Thus, in the foregoing
example, $10.00 represents 5 per cent on a market value of $200 but
only 3.33 percent on a market value of $300.
The dynamic formula also tells us that, if rents have been declining for a number of years, further declines are likely to be expected
and market values will reflect these pessimistic expectations. Thus
if the rent of a piece of land has been falling at the rate of 25 cents
a year and now yields $10.00, the market price will not be $200.00
but only $100.00. No one is going to buy a piece of land that is
expected to yield less and less as the years go by for a price that
represents a capitalization of its present earning power.
From what has been said it is obvious that the relationship between the current earning power and the current market value of
natural resources, while simple and obvious under the assumptions
of a closed and static society, is complex and uncertain in the real
world in which the only thing that is sure regarding the future is
that it will not be exactly what we expect it to be. Land values
reflect our hopes and fears for the future, and not simply the capitalization of present incomes.
Questions:
1. (a) Identify three meanings of the word "distribution" and indicate
which one is regarded as most significant for purposes of theoretical
analysis.
(b) What are the principal causes of large inequalities in the personal distribution of income in the United States today. Indicate with
supporting reasons, the consequences you would expect to follow
from a compulsory equalization of all personal incomes.
2. Identify "the factors of production" and explain how the forces of
3

C. R. Chambers, Relation of Land Income to Land Value, U.S. Department of Agriculture Bulletin, No. 1224,1924, p. 29.

DISTRIBUTION: PROFITS AND RENT

149

supply and demand set a valuation or price on each of the factors.
What are these valuations or prices called?
3. Assuming for the purposes of this question that the competitive market economy is "ethically" superior to any available alternative form
of economic organization, argue for or against the proposition that
the personal distribution of incomes which results from the operation
of market forces is to be regarded as ethically just.
4. Discuss critically the following statements:
(a) "In view of the definition of profits used in the text it is clear
that profits are an unnecessary source of personal income which result in needless inequalities in the personal distribution of the national income. It follows that the State should confiscate them through
taxation and use them to provide services which are of particular use
to low income families."
(b) "Since the businessman makes no distinction between land and
capital there is no good reason why the economist should treat them
as different."
(c) "Since land is a gift of nature there is no good reason, ethical
or economic, why farmers who are fortunate enough to operate superior lands (whether the superiority be due to soil or location)
should earn more than equally able and deserving farmers who are
forced to cultivate inferior lands. If the fortunate farmers do not
voluntarily pass on the surpluses which are due to the superiority of
their land to consumers in the form of lower prices or to their workers in the form of higher wages, the government should take away the
excess through a special tax on land rents."
5. "It is unjust that a land owner should be allowed to reap the going
rate of return on his investment in land and also the increase in the
value of the land that results from community growth."
(a) What determines what investors pay for land in a stationary
society? in a dynamic and growing society?
(b) Is the statement true?
(c) What effects would you expect to follow if the government undertook to tax away all future increases in land values?

13
Distribution:
The Functions of Rent

JLHE preceding analysis has led
some economists to argue that private incomes from land should
be abolished. The argument goes something like this:
"In a competitive economy market price just covers the expenses
of firms operating on marginal lands. Those operating on superior
lands enjoy lower expenses of production and pocket the difference
or pay it over to a third party, the landlord, according as they own
or rent the land. But the landlord did not create the land; he is not
responsible for its superiority. If he received no rent he would have
no more cause to complain than has the owner of marginal or norent land; and he would have no reason to withhold it from use for
the very simple reason that he must put it to use if he is to realize
an income from his capital and his labor. Rent is an unearned and
unnecessary income in the sense that it is needed neither to create
land nor to bring it into use nor to keep it in use. It is a surplus and
should be divided among the citizens."
This argument has long been used by "single taxers" to support
their proposal for a special and confiscatory tax on economic rent.
Others have used the argument to support land nationalization. We
shall consider the validity of these proposals in connection with our
discussion of the problem of vested rights. But first we should understand the important role rent plays in any society that expects
to use its human and natural resources effectively.

(1) Rent promotes effective land use. A primary function of rent

is to allocate every tract of land to its highest and best use. What
does this mean? It means that every bit of land should be used to
produce that good or service for which it is best suited and that it
150

DISTRIBUTION: THE FUNCTION OF RENT

151

should be under the control of the individual best qualified to use
it. Land should not be in corn if society's needs would be better
served by having it in wheat; it should not be in wheat if it would
be more useful in truck gardening; and it should not be in truck
gardening if it would be more useful as a residential or factory site.
Not only should land be in its appropriate use, but it should be used
with the appropriate degree of intensity. In technical language this
means that the investment in the land should be pushed to the
point where marginal cost equals the market price of the good or
service produced with the aid of the particular plot of land under
consideration. To accomplish these two purposes it is important
that A should not be allowed to determine the utilization of a tract
of land if B could do the job better.
This getting land into its highest and best use is of exceptional
importance because the physical supply of land, unlike population
and the physical supply of capital goods, can be increased little, if
at all. Human welfare depends, therefore, very largely upon the
effectiveness with which a society uses its natural resources.
In a society based upon private property and dependent upon
private initiatives this problem of highest and best use is resolved
through the real estate market. Buyers and sellers of land confront
one another in this market, and their bids and offers are constantly
reallocating specific tracts of land in an impersonal, but, on the
whole, effective way. A firm that cannot realize the full potentialities of a piece of land is forced by competition to give it up to a
more effective rival.
"Rent" control. The importance of rent as a device to assure the
best use of resources can be seen by examining the consequences of
controlling rents so that they cannot perform this function. "Rents"
have been controlled in various countries of Western Europe since
1914 and were controlled in this country during and after World
War II. The word "rent" is placed in quotation marks to indicate
that the rents involved were not "pure" rents, in the sense of returns
to land alone. The term "rent control" refers to the control of
rentals on real estate, which are a combined return on land and the
buildings and other capital goods attached to the land. The return
on capital goods attached to land has been described as quasi-rent.
Thus the rent which is controlled is really a combination of true
rent and quasi-rent. However, the experience under the various
rent control programs is a guide to what might be expected from
a control of true rents only.
The control program in this country during and after World War

152

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

II consisted of an attempt to keep rentals at approximately the prewar level. The demand for housing increased rapidly during the
war, largely because the money resources of consumers (one of the
determinants of demand) increased rapidly. As our analysis (see
p. 118) would lead us to expect, the combination of increased demand and a fixed price created "shortages" of housing. More housing was demanded at the going rentals than was available.
As a given commodity becomes relatively more scarce, one of the
functions of a price increase for that commodity is to signal the
need for more intensive use of available supplies. The rent control
program silenced that signal, and the result was a less rather than
a more efficient utilization of existing housing.
When it could be obtained, housing was a "bargain," and the
small family with a rising income was induced to take over more
rather than less space. Landlords were happy to cooperate because,
other things being equal, they usually prefer that a given space be
occupied by the small (perhaps child-less) family than by the large
family. For example, many apartment buildings housed a smaller
total population in 1944 than in 1940, in spite of the fact that all
units were occupied in 1944 while less than three-fourths of the
units were occupied in 1940. Housing space being more important,
relative to other commodities, to the large than to the small family,
the bidding in a free price market would have led the small family
to economize on space and would have freed more space for the
larger families.
Public opinion in this country, while favoring the rent control
program, refused to sanction the logical counterpart of the program
—rationing of housing space by the state. In many European countries, the authorities early recognized that government must take
over the rationing job that the price mechanism was no longer permitted to do. The housing authorities in some countries kept a constant inventory of housing space and its utilization. If they found
a given home with "extra" space, they ordered the owners to move
over and make room for more people.
A rationing program of this kind might be distasteful to the
American people, but, given a rent control program, it is certainly
a more efficient way of allocating space than to rely on the personal
whims and fancies of landlords—which is the rationing system that
comes into existence once the landlord is not permitted to let the
bids of potential renters determine who is to occupy a given space.
A further, long-run consequence of a rent control program is to
discourage the construction of new rental housing and the proper

DISTRIBUTION: T H E FUNCTION O F RENT

153

maintenance of existing housing. Our rent control authorities early
recognized the second part of this problem and forced landlords to
maintain property the return from which wasn't sufficient, under
rent control, to justify voluntary expenditures on maintenance.
They later recognized the first part of the problem by removing
rent ceilings on newly constructed rental units. The result was to
create an anomalous situation in which a given quality of rental
space in an older building cost less than half what the same accommodations cost in a newly constructed unit.
European experience. Many European countries have had rent
control for some 40 years now with the result that there has been
very little home building by private enterprise. Except where the
State stepped in and assumed this function, housing conditions deteriorated steadily. In Paris, for example, 27 percent of all residential buildings in 1948 were over 98 years old; 30 percent were
between 68 and 98 years old; 33 percent were 34 to 68 years old;
10 percent were between 12 and 34 years old. Less than one percent were under 12 years of age. With rentals taking as little as
one dollar a month of a worker's wage, it is not surprising that
owners have not kept the properties in good repair. Bertrand de
Jouvenal, the philosopher and economist, reports as typical the
case of a lady whose losses on the rent of 34 apartments runs to
$80 a month and who is dependent on her son to take care of her
and pay the loss. She cannot sell the properties as there are no
buyers. Nor can she postpone repairs indefinitely as the law holds
her responsible for damage to the furnishings of her tenants.1
In England landlords are reported to pay tramps to accept deeds
to old properties as a means of getting out from under the financial
burdens of ownership. The senior author of this book lived three
years in Vienna immediately after World War I and was, in fact,
paid to live in part of a large and beautifully furnished and heated
apartment by a landlord who wished to avoid having to take any
tenant the public authorities might assign to him.
A control program that related only to land rents would not in1
An excellent brief statement on the economics of rent control is to be found in
Milton Friedman and George J. Stigler, "Roofs or Ceilings?", Popular Essays on Cur*
rent Problems, Vol. I, No. 2, The Foundation for Economic Education, 1946.
The information on Paris is taken from Bertrand de Jouvenal, No Vacancies, The
Foundation for Economic Education, 1948.
A more comprehensive study of the economic, political, and ethical issues involved
in rent control, as revealed by Western Europe's long experience with the problem
will be found in Wilhelm Roepke, Wohnungszwangswirtschaft: Ein Europaeischet
Problem, Verlag Deutsche Wohnungswirtschaft, Diisseldorf: 1951.

154

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

fluence the construction of rental housing, except as it might prevent land from being used as a housing site. This possibility
follows from the fact that there would be no financial penalty on
keeping a plot of land in a socially less important use. However,
a long-continued control of true rents could lead to a deterioration
of land itself, unless the authorities were able to distinguish, with
great precision, between true rents and returns to capital invested
in maintaining the land.
After all, the actual dollars earned by a firm all look alike. The
economic theorist can allocate them to wages, interest, rents and
profits, but they bear no special labels. Hence a decision that the
State should take all the economic rent of land or fix the economic
rent might easily result in the State taking part of the interest which
the firm was earning on improvement and maintenance expenditures, or part of the rewards of superior management. Should this
happen, the gains to the community from the appropriation or control of rents might be more than offset by the adverse effects on
the utilization of the nation's natural resources.
This rather lengthy discussion of rent control was included here
to illustrate the fact that rent in an enterprise economy is not a
matter of ethics; it is a matter of function. The function of rent, as
the price paid for the use of land, is the same as the function of any
other price—to guide consumers in the use of goods and services
and to guide firms in the use of resources. If rents are controlled or
eliminated, some other way must be found to get these necessary
functions performed.
(2) Rent equalizes cost. A further consequence of rent payments
is that they tend to equalize costs of production among firms producing a given product at different locations and on different qualities of land. To the individual firm, rent is a cost of production.
In recognition of this fact, the material presented in Fig. 12-4 may
be modified as follows:
ATC

ATC

0

Grade I

ATC

Grade II

FIG. 13-1

0

Grade I

FIG. 13-2

MC

Grade II

ATC

DISTRIBUTION: THE FUNCTION OF RENT

155

The original average total cost curves of the firms are represented
by the solid ATC lines. The ATC curves which include the costs
to the firm of the rents paid (either explicitly or implicitly) for the
land are shown as the dotted ATC curves. It will be recalled that
the entire difference between costs and revenues for Zone I and II
farmers was described as rent. Once this rent is assigned as a cost
of production, the difference between costs and revenues for these
farmers becomes zero, just as it was from the beginning for Zone
III farmers.
In other words, once rent is accepted as a cost of production to
the firm, the firm using the good land is in no better profit position
than the firm using the poor or marginal land. The advantages of
the good land are absorbed by the owners of the land in the form
of rents.
Because of the equalizing influence of rents, it was not entirely
unrealistic for the authors to say in Chapter 11 that the minimum
average total cost of allfirmsin an industry in long-run equilibrium
would be equal.
A corollary to this analysis relates to the equalization of wages
and interest. If all rents were to be taxed away, the firm using
the good land would lose nothing by paying its workers and creditors higher returns than would be needed to obtain those resources.
Any difference between costs (excluding rent) and revenues would
be taken in taxes anyway. This would mean that a worker on
Zone I land might receive more than a worker on Zone II land,
who, in turn, might receive more than a worker on Zone III land.
A similar situation might exist with respect to the suppliers of capital.
Although we shall find that there are factors that prevent an
exact geographic equalization of wages and interest rates, there
would seem to be no economic or ethical justification for the type
of geographic differentials that would arise if the State attempted
to tax away rents. The State could prevent such a situation from
arising only if it computed the rent on each piece of land on the
assumption that the firm using the land was paying the "going"
rate for all resources used. This would require a determination of
the going rate for each resource in each case. The administrative
problems of such a scheme would be staggering.
(3) Rent exercises a decentralizing influence. High urban rents
are continuously forcing firms that can no longer benefit from proximity to large masses of people to seek out smaller centers where
rents and land values are lower. They attract to the great centers

156

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

of population the firms that can utilize intensively small tracts of
land. Were it not for the tendency of rents to vary with community size, over-urbanization would have gone much further than
it has in the United States.
THE PROBLEM OF VESTED RIGHTS

Henry George supported his proposal for a special confiscatory
tax on rent by two arguments: (a) that rent is an economic surplus not needed to bring about the effective use of land; and (b)
that present legal titles to land are defective because, in the beginning, land was common property and the original claims to exclusive possession rested on violence. We have already considered
the first argument. Here we consider the second.
With a view to clarifying the issue let us admit that the origins
of private property in land everywhere in the world may very possibly go back to acts of violence. Certainly the early settlers of
this country did not get the lands from the Indians in a peaceful
and voluntary exchange. Regardless of origin it is safe to say that
primitive man would not have emerged from barbarism if he and
his fellows had not reached an agreement to respect one another's
possessions, including lands under cultivation—or been forced to
do so. Specialization, exchange, accumulation, tool making, and
the elaboration of more and more roundabout methods of production depended upon respect for possession, and private property
is simply socially sanctioned and protected possession.
Now it may have been a mistake for society ever to have granted
protected possession of land in perpetuity. Perhaps it would have
been wiser, for example, had the American colonists been granted
relatively long leases, rather than outright ownership in fee simple
of portions of the public domain. That tenants will make durable
and expensive improvements on leased land is amply proved by
historical evidence. Much of the urban land of England is held
on long-term leases. During the 1930s the Rockefeller family invested millions of dollars in the small tract of land now know as
Rockefeller Center. They hold this land on a 99-year lease from
Columbia University. At the expiration of the lease the University
will come into possession of the Center. The most important thing
with respect to land is not perpetual ownership but security of tenure—the assurance that one's right to the use of a tract of land will
be respected until such time as one has recovered the value of
the permanent improvements he plans to make upon the land. A
long lease with the right to sell the unexpired portion of the lease

DISTRIBUTION: THE FUNCTION OF RENT

157

in the open market is a very good substitute for a title in fee simple.
It is tempting to speculate about what the situation in the United
States would be like today if the vast territories ceded to the Confederation in 1785 had been forever held in trust for the American
people. It is easy to argue, and impossible to prove, that the early
settlers would have braved the dangers and the hardships of the
frontier for 49-year leases just as cheerfully as they did for perpetual titles. Had they done so, the values of the leases would have
risen for a time as a result of the growth of population and the
growth of the demand for the products of the land, only to fall
back toward zero as the maturity date approached. Then when
the leases were renewed, presumably at public auction, the government would have come into possession of the substantial rents
that now go to individuals in perpetuity by virtue of the decision
to dispose of the domain in fee simple. These rents might or might
not have permitted the federal government to dispense with onerous taxes. That would have depended on the public attitude
toward large-scale spending by the federal government.
The refusal to allow land owners to enjoy rents in perpetuity
would have forced consumers to pay more than they did during
the 19th century for the products of the land. This is due to the
fact that the owners of land in fee simple cannot in the short-run
get the going wage for their labor, the going interest rate on the
improvements they make on the land, and secure in addition all of
the future rise in rents. If experience indicates that these rent increases will occur, competition forces land owners to share them
with the public. The chronic overexpansion of American agriculture throughout the 19th century, and the present situation, are
due in part to the lure of the so-called "unearned increment" that
induced pioneers to take up land which, at the time, was submarginal.
But all this is idle speculation. The federal government first sold
and later gave away (The Homestead Acts) most of the domain
and the temper of the people was hostile to the idea of public
ownership. The pioneers wanted fee simple ownership and nothing
less. It is against this background that the equity of taxing away
the value of land or confiscating the title to land must be judged.
Henry George "single taxers" are ardent advocates of private
property and private enterprise. All they object to is that the owners of land should get the rent. They would leave the titles to land
in private hands, but would confiscate rents by a special tax on
land. Marxian socialists take the position that private property in

158

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

the instruments of production is morally wrong, whether it be represented by land or by concrete capital goods. They would confiscate both.
The position of the "single taxers" seems to most economists to be
quite untenable, because of the gross discrimination involved. The
confiscation of land rents would wipe out land values and penalize
those who happened to own land at the time the change was made.
Those who oppose such discrimination say that present owners
have a vested right which should be respected. By this they mean
that present owners invested in good faith at a time when public
opinion looked with approval upon the institution of private property in land. Hence the good faith of the social group has been
pledged. Legitimate expectations have been created that cannot
be disappointed without causing serious material and moral
damage.
The unearned increment. To meet the vested rights argument
the proposal has been made that society should content itself with
taxing away all future increases in rents or land values. Quite aside
from the serious administrative difficulties involved, this proposal
would still be discriminatory in that it would single out and impose
an additional burden on a special group. The discrimination would
be due to the fact that in a society in which rents have been rising
for some time past—and it is only in such a society that there would
be a widespread demand for a special land increment tax—competition forces land owners to content themselves with a rate of return
on land purchases which is below the prevailing rate of interest.
Taxing away an expected future increase in rent involves the confiscation of a portion of the present value of land.
In a market economy any sudden change in the rules of the game
—i.e., any special benefits accorded to or special burdens imposed
on owners of land—are promptly reflected in land values. Those
who own the land at the time the change is made reap the benefits
or suffer the losses. Those who buy land thereafter are neither
better off nor worse off.
The police power. A fastidious respect for property rights would
make it impossible to modify them without compensation, regardless of how badly they operated. Yet obviously property rights
must be redefined from time to time to fit them to the changing
needs of social life. Under the police power the redefining may be
made without compensation. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to use this power?
Our own view is that in principle the State may use the police

DISTRIBUTION: T H E FUNCTION O F RENT

159

power (without compensation) to halt practices that are profitable
only because the responsible party is not obliged to pay all the indirect costs resulting from his action. Erosion control, stream polution control, urban zoning ordinances, municipal building codes
designed to reduce fire and health hazards, etc., are examples of
restrictions on property rights that are needed to supplement the
price mechanism. As will be pointed out later, the abuses that such
compulsory interventions are designed to correct would be automatically halted if the injured parties could bill the offenders regularly for their losses. This concept provides a rational basis for
distinguishing between public interventions that work with and
improve the operation of the price mechanism and public interventions that work against it. It does not settle the debate regarding
the relative merits of private enterprise and socialism, but, properly
understood, it can help a people make rational as against emotional
choices.
Questions:
1. "In a socialist society in which all the instruments of production, including land, belong to all the people, there would be no rent." Argue
for or against the correctness of this statement.
2. How would you expect a heavy special tax on real estate rentals (i.e.,
on the rent of land and on the permanent improvements such as
buildings) to affect the market value of (a) the improvements and
(b) the land in the short-run? in the long-run?
3. The "vested rights" argument has led many who share the conviction
that rent is out of place in a competitive enterprise system to advocate as a compromise the taxing away of the "unearned increment."
Identify the "vested rights" argument and argue for and against the
social desirability of taxing away the unearned increment. Define
the term "unearned increment."
4. A merchant advertises that his prices are low because he is "out of
the high rent district." Does experience show that in general the
things you buy cost more in the central shopping district than in the
outlying stores? If not, why are merchants willing and able to pay
the higher rents prevailing in the central shopping district?
5. "There is an obvious inconsistency in the treatment of rent in the
text. At one point the authors state that rent is a result and not a
cause of the prevailing level of prices. At a later point they declare
that rent is a cost of production to the individual firm." Argue for
or against the charge of inconsistency.

160

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

6. Argue for or against the validity of the following statements:
(a) "If the State should attempt to tax away the entire economic
rent of land it would be forced by events to regulate interest and
wage rates as well."
(b) "Rent control without rationing of housing space tends to make a
bad situation worse."
(c) "Zoning is a much more flexible and equitable instrument for
promoting socially desirable uses of land than is taxation."
7. One of the early acts of the British Labour Government was to require
landowners to pay over to the state a substantial part of any increase
in the value of their lands on the occasion of a sale. Indicate with
supporting reasons the probable effects of this law on the ability of
ptivate enterprise to bring about the changes in land use required
by radical changes in international demand for goods and services
caused by World War II.

14
Distribution: Interest

AN THIS chapter we shall investigate the nature of interest as a distribution share and the function
of interest as a price. We shall find that this study leads us to reexamine one of the important decisions in economic life, first described in our study of the economy of Crusoe's island.

THE PRESENT versus THE FUTURE
Robinson Crusoe had to divide his time not only between fishing
and berry-picking but also between fishing and the making of fishnets. In other words, one of his problems was to allocate his resources between the production of goods for direct consumption
and the production of capital goods. The capital goods, such as the
fish-nets and the canoe, would assure him a larger flow of goods in
the future, but could be produced only at the sacrifice of some
goods or some leisure in the present.
If he had spent all of his time fishing, berry-picking, and so forth,
and none at making or repairing tools and equipment, he would
have enjoyed no improvement in his level of living. In fact, as his
salvaged equipment wore out, his level of living would have declined. On the other hand, if he had spent all of his time making
fish-nets and other capital goods, he would literally have starved
to death. Between these two extremes he found a balance between
the production of goods for immediate consumption and the production of capital goods, a balance which he considered to be optimal in terms of the situation as he saw it.
In Crusoe's world he alone determined when the proper balance
had been struck. In a modern economy, the problem of finding
the proper balance is exceedingly important and exceedingly complex.
161

162

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

The importance of the decision. Proper resource allocation,
whether among present goods or between present goods and future
goods, is always important. If the greatest number of human wants
are to be satisfied, resources must not be wasted. Waste can occur
if either too many or too few resources are allocated to the production of capital goods, i.e., future goods. Also, as we shall see in
our discussion of the business cycle, waste can occur if the operation of the system calls for extensive and rapid swings in the allocation of resources between the production of consumption goods and
the production of capital goods.
Even a proper balance as determined through market processes
can be unsatisfactory when measured against various noneconomic
criteria. For example, a balance that satisfies consumers as consumers may provide for a smaller allocation of resources to capital
goods production (and, hence, a lower rate of economic growth)
than those same individuals, as citizens of a national state, believe
consistent with national security. Or a balance that produces a
very rapid rate of economic growth may produce serious sociological and political problems because of the inability of the society to
adjust to the rapid changes caused by a rapid rate of capital formation. Dislike of change may lead to political decisions deliberately designed to slow down the rate of capital formation.
These are important considerations, but they lie largely beyond
the range of competence of the economist as economist. We shall
concentrate our attention on market processes as they tend to produce a proper balance as measured by the wishes of consumers.
The complexity of the problem. To attain and maintain a proper
balance between the production of consumption goods and capital
goods is one of the most difficult problems confronting any modern
industrial economy, whether it be organized under a free market
or any other form of economic organization.1
One important complicating factor in a modern economy is the
use of money as a measure of subjective valuations. Crusoe could
measure the comparative value of present and future goods directly;
moreover, he could see the direct cost of making capital goods as
that cost was reflected in fewer goods for immediate consumption.
In a modern economy, these relationships can be measured only
indirectly, only in terms of money. If the value of money were
constant over time, no great difficulties would stand in the way
of a proper allocation of resources between the production of con1

In Chapter 44 we shall show how a socialistically organized society might solve the
problem.

DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

163

sumption goods and the production of capital goods. However, the
value of money is not constant over time. The problem of comparing present goods to future goods is thus complicated by changes
in the length of the "yardstick."
Another complicating factor in a modern economy is the element
of uncertainty. In an economy characterized by change—by
changes in consumer tastes, in technology, in population, etc.—no
person can predict with certainty the value of the goods that will
be produced by a given capital good over its life span. The comparison of present sacrifices to future gains can never be better
than a reasoned guess. The inevitable errors would be serious
under any circumstances. When the operation of the system tends
to compound errors so as to produce cumulative swings, first in one
direction, then another, the problem of maintaining economic stability becomes exceedingly difficult.
ATTAINING BALANCE IN A STATIONARY ECONOMY
We shall begin our study of the allocation of resources between
present and future goods in an imaginary world from which the
complications discussed above have been eliminated. The price
level is assumed to remain constant; changes in taste, in technology,
and in population are excluded. Then, in this and later chapters,
we shall move closer to reality by permitting these uncertainty factors to intrude on the decisions made in economic life.
The "proper balance." Our first task is to define the "proper balance" beween the production of consumption goods and the
production of capital goods. The theory of a free economy, in
which the consumer is "boss," would indicate that the proper balance is that which maximizes the satisfactions of the individuals
who make up the economy. Moreover, the theory would indicate
that this balance should be attained through a market process which
reflects the free decisions of those individuals.
The loanable funds market. The market in which resources are
allocated between consumption goods and capital goods in a free
economy is the market for loanable funds. To this market some
individuals bring their funds to be "loaned." These funds are a
rough measure of the willingness of these people to curtail their
current consumption and thus to release resources from the production of present goods. To this market other individuals bring their
desire to "borrow." This desire is a rough measure of their evaluation of the goods that could be produced in the future by capital
goods constructed in the present.

164

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

The interaction between these two groups results in a series of
loan transactions at specified prices. The price of the borrowed
funds is the interest rate which the borrower must pay the lender.
The fact that interest is a price is difficult to perceive, in part
because of the unusual way in which it is stated. We are accustomed to prices stated in terms of so much per pound, per bushel,
or per ticket. The price of borrowed funds is stated as a percentage
per time period of the commodity whose services are being hired.
Thus the price for the use of $100 of loanable funds may be 5%, or
$5.00 per year.
Like any price in a market economy, the price of loanable funds
is determined by the forces of supply and demand. Thus, in a
purely competitive market, the equilibrium price or interest rate
will be that price which just clears the market, which equates the
amount of funds supplied to the amount demanded. An increase
in the supply of loanable funds, demand being unchanged, will
cause the interest rate to fall, and vice versa. As in any market, an
arbitrary price set below the equilibrium rate will create a shortage
of loanable funds. A price set above the equilibrium rate will create
a surplus of loanable funds.
The pattern of rates. As with other commodities, there is not
one but a large number of markets for loanable funds, distinguished
one from another by area, by the length of time over which the
loan is to extend, by the degree of risk involved, etc. Thus it is
technically wrong to speak of the interest rate. In a real economy,
there are literally thousands of interest rates. However, there is a
rough relationship among all of these rates such that they usually
(but certainly not always) rise and fall together. Certain general
forces are at work in each of the markets for loanable funds, and
our task is to identify them. This we shall do by examining the
forces that lie behind the supply of and the demand for loanable
funds.
The supply of loanable funds. In an economy with a fixed stock

of money, the only source of loanable funds is the savings of the
individuals and firms who make up the economy. In an economy
in which the stock of money is a variable, a second source of loanable funds exists; the second source is money newly created either
by the State or the banks. We shall postpone our discussion of interest in this latter economy until we have examined the topics of
money and banking in greater detail. At the moment we shall concentrate on the determination and the role of interest rates in a
stationary economy with a fixed stock of money. Our findings here

DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

165

will permit us to evaluate the consequences of changes in the stock
of money on the allocation of resources as between the consumption
goods and capital goods sectors of the economy.
In any economy, a household can acquire a stock of loanable
funds by the simple act of not spending all of its income for consumption goods. This negative act of not spending for consumption
goods is defined as saving. In the same way, a firm may gain possession of savings by not devoting all of its revenues to direct expenses and by not distributing the surplus to the equity owners.
It is from these two groups of savers that the supply of loanable
funds must come in an economy with a fixed money supply. In
such an economy, the supply of loanable funds is equivalent to the
supply of voluntary savings.
The supply schedule. The supply of loanable funds in a given
market can be represented by a schedule showing the number of
dollars that savers would be willing to offer at a series of prices
(interest rates) at a given moment of time. A hypothetical supply
schedule of loanable funds is shown in Table 14-1.
TABLE 1 4 - 1
THE SUPPLY OF LOANABLE FUNDS

Interest
Rate %

Dollars
Offered

10
7
5
3
1

70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
20,000

The schedule shows that the savers in this market are willing to
offer more dollars at higher interest rates than at lower interest
rates. How can this be explained?
Time preference. Each of you can answer the question above by
introspection. Suppose you were offered the choice of a dollar
today or a dollar one year from now. Which would you take? If
you are like most human beings, you will take the dollar today. In
other words, you prefer present satisfactions to future satisfactions.
This is the principle of time preference.
Now suppose that you are offered a choice between a dollar today and something over a dollar one year from now. As the "some-

166

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

thing over a dollar" is increased from $1.01 to $1.02 to $1.03 and
so on, it will eventually reach a level where you will take it in preference to the dollar today. If this were to be the level of $1.05,
your rate of time preference would be measured by the 5 cents on
the dollar which is needed to overcome your preference for the
present over the future.
Obviously different people have different rates of time preference. Some of you might take the "something over a dollar" when
it reaches $1.02; others, not until it reaches $1.25 or even more.
However, almost all of you would prefer the present to the future
at some rate, and the future to the present at some rate.
From this discussion it is clear that, other things being equal, a
higher interest rate will entice more dollars out of consumption
goods markets than will a lower interest rate.
Liquidity preference. Another way of viewing the situation is to
see it as a choice between a dollar today and the promise of a dollar a year from now. The dollar today is "liquid" that is, it can be
exchanged directly for goods and services. The promise of a dollar
a year from now, even if it is certain to be honored, cannot be exchanged directly for goods and services. The promise is not liquid;
a clerk in a shoe store will not accept it as part payment for a pair
of shoes. The 5 cents on the dollar may be viewed as the inducement needed to persuade you to give up a liquid asset (a dollar
today) in exchange for a nonliquid asset (a promise of a dollar a
year from now).
We are using the concept of liquidity preference to explain the
nature of the supply of loanable funds. Later, we shall find that
it is used by many economists to explain the demand for money to
be held in the form of cash. We shall also find that these two uses
of the concept of liquidity preference are not inconsistent.
Determinants of the supply schedule. Many factors determine
the level of the supply of loanable funds. A change in one of these
factors can lead to either more or less being offered than before at
each interest rate.
Many of the factors determining the level of the supply of loanable funds are sociological in nature. For example a society in
which thrift and simple living are marks of "right" behavior will
tend to save more at any interest rate than a society in which ostentatious spending is the mark of social propriety. The "temper of the
people," then, is an important determinant of the level of saving.
Advertising may play a significant role in determining the temper
of the people. By radio, television, newspapers, magazines, and bill-

DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

167

boards, we are constantly urged to buy a great variety of attractive
products. The result may well be that we are induced to spend a
larger fraction of our incomes for consumption goods than we
would if untempted by the activities of the advertiser. It is interesting to note that the various savings institutions have counterattacked by making use of advertising to attract our dollars into
savings channels.
The "temper of the times'' also seems to be an important factor.
For example, a war may induce a live-for-today attitude that increases the rate at which people prefer present goods to future
goods. On the other hand, a long period of stability and peace may
bring a decrease in the rate at which people prefer present goods to
future goods.
The most important short-run determinant of the level of saving
seems to be income. The higher a person's income, the more he
will save at any interest rate, and vice versa. In the same way,
the higher a nation's income, the more total saving at any interest
rate, other things being equal. In fact, saving seems to increase
more than in proportion to increases in income.
This indicates that the distribution of income will also be an important determinant of the level of total saving in an economy.
The rich tend to save a larger percentage of their incomes than do
the poor. Hence the larger the fraction of the national income
going to the rich, the larger will be the fraction of the income that
will be saved. Conversely, the smaller the fraction of the national
income going to the rich, the smaller will be the fraction of the
income that will be saved.
We shall find that these factors determining the level of saving
assume great importance in the discussion of business cycles.
A concluding note on the supply of loanable funds. We are attempting to explain how resources are allocated between consumption and capital goods in a market economy. It is important to
recognize that the supply of loanable funds, which is equal to the
supply of voluntary savings in our model, represents the willingness of individuals to release resources from the production of present consumption goods. We turn now to a study of the factors
determining the willingness of other individuals to use the released
resources for the production of capital goods.
The demand for loanable funds. We have found in time preference a reason why individuals must be paid interest on their
funds if they are to make such funds available. We now wish to
know why others are willing to pay interest for the use of those

168

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

funds. We shall find the answer in the factors determining the demand for loanable funds.
The demand schedule. The demand for loanable funds in a given
market may be represented by a schedule showing the number of
dollars that borrowers stand ready to take off the market at a series
of interest rates at a given moment of time. Table 14-2 presents a
hypothetical demand schedule for loanable funds.
TABLE

14-2

THE DEMAND FOR LOANABLE FUNDS

Interest
Rate %

Dollars
Taken

10
7
5
3
1

5,000
25,000
50,000
80,000
120,000

This schedule shows that the borrowers in this market are willing
to borrow more dollars at lower interest rates than at higher interest
rates. How can this be explained?
The answer is to be found in the uses to which households and
firms put loanable funds.
Consumption uses. Households usually borrow money to buy a
house, a refrigerator, a car, or to take a vacation trip or meet a
heavy hospital bill—to do something which the current income of
the household will not support. This is one source of the demand
for loanable funds.
The higher the interest rate that must be paid for borrowed
funds, the more future income the household must sacrifice to acquire a given increase in present income. For this reason, households tend to borrow less money at higher interest rates than at
lower interest rates, other things being equal.
Capital uses. In a modern economy* the most important source
of demand for loanable funds consists of the firms in the economy.
Firms use the borrowed funds to buy the various capital goods used
in production—the buildings, the machinery, the tools and equipment, etc. These funds may come from the undistributed earnings
of the firms or from the savings of the owners of the firms or from
the savings of those who have no direct connection with the firms.

DISTRIBUTION:

INTEREST

169

Whatever their source, these funds make it possible for firms to
acquire the capital component of the resource combination used in
production.
The productivity of capital. It is the extra output made possible
by the use of capital goods that induces the firms to pay interest on
funds used to obtain those capital goods. Phrased another way, it
is the superiority of roundabout, capital-using methods of production over direct, noncapital-using methods that explains the willingness of firms to pay interest for the use of borrowed funds. But
why will they take more funds at a lower than at a higher interest
rate? The answer is to be found in part in the law of diminishing
returns or, more accurately, the law of variable outputs.
After a firm has acquired a certain amount of capital, the management of the firm finds that each added unit of capital makes a
smaller contribution to output than the previous unit. This situation was discussed before under the heading of "returns to scale of
plant." 2 Given this situation, the firm will add more units of capital at a lower interest rate than at a higher interest rate.
Actually capital goods usually cannot be divided into small units,
nor are they homogeneous with respect to use. The situation in a
given market is usually something like this: Various potential uses
exist for various-sized "lumps" of capital goods. In some of these
uses, the capital goods would yield, say, an 8% to 15% return on
the cost of the capital goods. In other uses, the return might be
only 5% to 8%; in still others, less than 5%. If the interest rate were
to be 8%, funds would be borrowed to undertake only the 8-15%
return projects. If the interest rate were 5%, funds would be borrowed to undertake all projects that would yield something over 5%.
If the interest rate were 3%, the way would be opened for even
more capital-goods' projects to be undertaken. Thus, the market
demand for loanable funds would show that greater amounts would
be borrowed at lower than at higher interest rates.
The determinants of the demand for loanable funds. Firms buy
capital goods to be able to maintain or increase their output of other
capital goods or of consumer goods. The ultimate goal of production is the sale of goods to consumers. In this sense, one determinant of the demand for loanable funds is the expected demand
for consumer goods over the life of the capital goods purchased
with the funds. We shall find that this relationship between the
demand for consumer goods and the demand for capital goods is
of great importance in analyzing business fluctuations. Here it suf^ See Chapter 10.

170

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

fices to recognize that, other things being equal, the greater the expected demand for consumer goods, the greater the demand for
capital goods, and hence the greater the demand for loanable funds
with which to purchase those capital goods.
Another important determinant of the demand for loanable
funds is the level of technology in the economy. The higher the
level of technology, the more productive the capital goods, and the
greater will be the demand for loanable funds.
Even more important than the level is the technological trend.
If progress in the mechanical arts is rapid, the rate of obsolescence
of existing capital goods will also be rapid. This situation will increase the demand for loanable funds even more than the existing
level of technology. Population growth has a similar effect. Here,
however, these dynamic forces are deliberately excluded.
The productivity of capital will also be influenced by the availability and quality of resources used in connection with capital
goods. If the natural or human resources required to make capital
goods productive are not available, the demand for capital goods
will be correspondingly low.3
Various sociological and political factors also are important determinants of the demand for loanable funds. We shall have occasion to discuss such factors in later chapters, particularly in the
chapters dealing with our international economic relations.
The equilibrium interest rate. We are now in a position to bring
supply and demand together and to show how the interest rate is
determined and what functions it performs in a market economy.
TABLE

14-3

THE SUPPLY OF AND DEMAND FOR LOANABLE FUNDS

Interest Rate %

Dollars Offered

Dollars Taken

10
7
5
3
1

70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
20,000

5,000
25,000
50,000
80,000
120,000

Table 14-3 brings together the data from the two separate tables
constructed to illustrate the supply of and the demand for loan3

Economists with their penchant for name calling have dubbed this relationship "the
principle of complementarity."

DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

171

able funds. It can be seen that this market would be cleared only
at an interest rate of 5%. If the rate "happened" to be 3%, more
funds would be demanded than would be offered. The bids of the
would-be borrowers for the short supply of funds would drive the
rate up to 5%. If the interest rate "happened" to be 7%, the bids of
the would-be lenders would drive the rate back down to 5%. An
interest rate of 5% represents the equilibrium rate in this market.
The fact that this rate clears the market is of great importance.
It indicates that the rate of use of resources for the production of
capital goods will be just equal to the amount of resources released
voluntarily by the saving decisions in the economy. In other words,
the equilibrium rate of interest in our model economy produces
that "proper balance" between the production of capital goods and
the production of consumer goods which is consistent with the
wishes of the individuals who make up the economy.
Also, if the market is cleared, and if the supply of loanable funds
is equal to the supply of savings, there can be neither a shortage
nor a surplus of savings. A surplus of savings would mean that
some of the funds saved would not find their way into capital goods
channels—in other words, savings would be greater than investment
outlets for savings. The interest rate would fall, consumption would
increase, and a new equilibrium rate of interest would emerge. This
adjustment takes time. We shall come back to it in the discussion
of the business cycle.
THE FUNCTIONS OF INTEREST
One important function of the interest rate has already been
described. It is to produce that allocation of resources between
present goods and future goods which is consistent with the wishes
of the individuals who make up the economy. The consequences
of not permitting the interest rate to perform this function will be
examined in a later chapter.4
Given the amount of resources to be devoted to the production
of capital goods, the interest rate also serves to allocate those capital goods among the various firms that want to use them.
The competitive bidding for funds to purchase capital goods
"squeezes out" those who would put capital goods to less efficient
uses and tends to place those goods in the hands of the firms that
can make the best use of them.
If the interest rate is not permitted to handle this rationing problem, the State or some other organization is forced to do the ration4

See Chapter 29.

172

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

ing. The general assumption in a market economy is that rationing
problems can be best handled by the market mechanism, and there
seems to be no more reason to question this assumption with reference to the rationing of loanable funds than the rationing of any
other good or service sold in the economy.
Interest as a distributive share. It should be obvious that the
foregoing market process will allocate a certain share of the national
income to those who have loaned money. The single word "interest" is often used to designate this distributive share.
The interest share is often identified as "that going to the owners
of capital." However, not all funds are loaned for the purchase of
capital goods, nor does the ownership of the capital goods necessarily pass to the lender. Thus this identification of interest with
the share going to the owners of capital is no better than an illustrative identification. It illustrates the fact that the most important
use of loaned funds is the purchase of capital goods and that the
expected productivity of extra units of capital goods is the primary
determinant of the demand for loanable funds. Also it illustrates the
fact that the waiting involved in using capitalistic (roundabout)
methods of production is "painful," and that those who do the waiting are rewarded with some share of the national income.
The ethics of interest. From earliest times, many men have objected to the charging of interest on loaned funds. We do not
propose to debate at this point the ethics of interest-taking. It is
part and parcel of the larger issue of the ethics of the private-enterprise system itself. That issue is raised in our discussion of Alternatives to Capitalism. All that we wish to point out here are the
consequences of prohibiting interest-taking.
The prohibition of interest would drastically reduce, if not elim
inate entirely, voluntary savings. If the people still wished to release resources for the production of capital goods, they would
have to charge the State or some other agency with the task of
determining how much was to be saved, who was to do the saving,
and what agencies would get the savings and use them for capital
goods production. These are the functions now performed by the
interest rate, and they must be handled in some other way if interest is to be eliminated. We shall have more to say of this in
Chapter 44.
Saving as an institutional process. The lender-borrower relationship in a modern economy is a complex relationship, with the actual
transactions usually handled through such institutions as insurance
companies, savings banks, stock and bond brokerage houses, invest-

DISTRIBUTION: INTEREST

173

ment trusts, etc. This type of specialization usually improves the
efficiency of the loanable funds market. The individual saver is
often not in a position to know where his funds can best be used,
and the individual borrower is not in a position to know which
individuals have funds available. The specialized saving-investing
institutions channel funds from savers to borrowers, and the result
is not only a better use of the funds but also a larger flow of funds.
The larger flow results from the greater ease with which savers can
find outlets for their savings and borrowers can find sources of
supply.
However, many of the institutions through which savings flow
into the hands of investors are multipurpose institutions. This can
lead to a less efficient use of funds if the other purposes of the institutions influence the handling of savings. Also these other purposes may call for a type of government regulation of the use of
funds which changes the direction of flow of funds. Thus insurance
companies may be denied the opportunity to place any substantial
volume of the savings that they collect in risk or venture capital
lines. This may be sound regulation in terms of the insurance function of the companies, but it may reduce the flow of funds into the
very important venture capital lines.
This is illustrative of the practical problems of maintaining an
institutional structure that will serve the market system of economic
organization. Every type of institution, whether it be an insurance
company, a corporation, a trade union, a bank, etc., can either improve the operation of the system or make it work less efficiently—
usually it is a mixture of both at any given moment of time. The
task of a people who wish to use a free market system is to work
patiently and rationally with the institutions that participate in the
markets so that institutions are given every opportunity to contribute to the efficiency of the system and few opportunities to reduce
the efficiency of the system. This type of control is usually effected
through the agency of government, and proper government handling of such controls is not only consistent with but necessary to
the operation of a free-enterprise system.
Questions:
1. Identify the following concepts: capital goods; consumer goods;
present goods; future goods; loanable funds; time preference and rate
of time preference; liquidity preference and rate of liquidity prefer-

174

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

ence; the productivity of capital and the marginal productivity of
capital.
2. (a) Identify the limiting assumptions used in this chapter in explaining the determination of the pattern of interest rates;
(b) Given these assumptions, show (i) why the rate of demand for
loanable funds must be equal to the rate of supply of loanable funds;
(ii) why the equilibrium pattern of interest rates will be determined
by the prevailing rate of time preference; and at the same time will
be equal to the marginal productivity of capital.
3. Public authorities have frequently undertaken to prohibit the taking
of interest or to set a maximum rate which was below the equilibrium
rate.
(a) Discuss the consequences you would expect to result from either
of these two acts.
(b) Identify the functions which the interest rate serves in a private
enterprise economy.
(c) Do you think that a socialist state could dispense with interest
as the price paid for the use of loanable funds if its objective was to
maximize the satisfactions of the citizens as consumers?
4. Dropping the limiting assumptions regarding the fixity of the supply
of money and the absence of change in technology and in population,
but retaining the assumptions of complete factor mobility and zero
reservation prices on the part of resource owners, indicate the shortand the long-run effects of each of the changes listed below on the
rate of interest in a country with a relatively high standard of living:
(a) an increase in personal income inequalities with the national
income remaining unchanged; (b) a costly war; (c) the development
of a widespread belief in the early end of the world; (d) the breakdown of domestic law and order; (e) a doubling of the money supply; (f) the perfection and wide adoption of an important labor
saving device involving a large capital investment; (g) the opening of
an unsettled and fertile territory to settlement; (h) a drastic lowering
of tariff barriers affecting many products of a country with a much
lower level and standard of living.
5. What effect would a fall in the equilibrium pattern of rates have on
the market prices of (a) outstanding government bonds maturing
(payable) 20 years hence; 6 months hence? (b) land? (c) corporate
common stock? (d) corporate preferred stock? (e) labor, i.e., wage
rates?

15
Distribution: Wages

WAGES are the share of the national income going to individuals in payment for their personal
services, as distinguished from the services rendered by their land
and capital. The President of the United States, the Chairman of
the Board of Standard Oil of New Jersey, and the migratory farm
laborer all earn wages. This share is determined at the same time
and by the same processes and forces that determine rent, interest,
and profits.
Review of the analysis to this point. In a dynamic and changing
economy, profits are the residual share. They go to the entrepreneurs or innovators. They vary from plant to plant, and from industry to industry. In the aggregate they may be positive or
negative, depending on general business conditions. Present profits
absorb suddenly emerging surpluses, while past profits make it
possible for the owners of firms to shoulder unexpected losses.
Hence they fluctuate much more than the other three shares.
Among other things profits relieve the other claimants on the national income of risks, stabilize their claims, and direct the economy as a whole toward that "smoothly rotating state"1 which we
have called long-run equilibrium. As the economy approaches this
hypothetical position, the losses and gains become smaller and
smaller, until they finally disappear, and the erstwhile innovators
and suppliers of risk capital become managers of resources who
earn wages and receive interest and rent in the event that they are
also capitalists and landlords.
When this stage is reached, landlords get their share (rent) because of the superiority of their lands over marginal land. The
1
This is the term used by Ludwig von Mises in Human Action, Yale Univ. Press,
New Haven: 1950.

175

176

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

capitalists get their share as determined by the pure rate of time
preference prevailing at the time the economy reaches its equilibrium position. The rate is just enough to provide the going level
of rewards to the owners of the resources which are devoted to
maintaining the society's equipment intact. The rewards also equal
the marginal productivity of the intramarginal lands and the marginal productivity of capital. The workers get the rest. The sum
total of the three shares represents the national income.
DETERMINATION OF WAGE RATES

If all workers were completely interchangeable and completely
indifferent as to what they did and where they did it, and if all
brought to the labor market capacities, skills, and attitudes so identical as to make it a matter of indifference to managers whether
they employed one worker or another, then our explanation of
wages could be wound up at this point. All workers, including the
salaried managers of the firms, would get the same real rates of
pay. In brief there would be a single wage rate for labor.
This single wage rate for labor would be determined in the same
way as all other prices in the economy—that is, by the interaction
of the forces of supply and demand. The equilibrium wage rate
would be that which would just clear the market. A wage rate
above the equilibrium rate would produce a "surplus" of workers;
a rate below the equilibrium rate would produce a "shortage" of
workers. Neither shortages nor surpluses could exist if the wage
rate were free to seek the equilibrium, or market-clearing level.
The supply of labor services. The supply of labor services would
be determined by the number of potential workers in the economy
and by the decisions those people would make regarding the number of hours they would be willing to work at each of a series of
wage rates over a given period of time. This last decision would
be determined by the prevailing standard of living.
The role of standards and levels of living. A standard of living
is different from a level of living. A family's level of living is what
it actually consumes; its standard of living is what the head of the
household thinks that the level should be. A standard represents an
aspiration; a level represents an actuality. Economic progress appears to depend upon the existence of a gap between the two. In
poor and industrially underdeveloped countries the two tend to coincide. This affects the response of workers to offers of higher
money wages. In the technical language of economics the market
supply curve of labor tends to be negatively inclined above some

DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

177

modest wage level which covers the prevailing level of living. A
wage above this rate reduces rather than increases the number of
hours of labor offered on the market. In such countries attempts
to improve the level of living usually have to wait on improvements
in the standard of living, that is, on a raising of the economic goals
of the people. They must come to want more before ways can be
found to provide them with more.
In a country like ours the standard of living is well above the prevailing level of living. The result is that the market supply curve
of labor tends to be positively inclined over a very wide range of
wage rates. More labor hours will be offered at a higher wage than
at a lower wage. This may be offset to some extent by the fact that
the higher the income of the main breadwinner in the family, the
less the pressure on secondary family members to seek employment.
So far we have spoken of the market demand or total demand
for labor and the fact that the total or market supply curve of labor
tends to have a positive or upward inclination. If all the firms want
more labor, assuming, as we do here, full employment, the price of
an hour's labor will rise and more labor hours will be forthcoming.
It does not follow, however, that the supply curve for labor confronting the individual firm will also be positively inclined. On the
contrary, in a purely competitive market the supply of resources
to any single firm will be infinitely elastic. The firm may buy as
many or as few units of any resource as it wishes at the going price
without causing any finite change in the price.
Supply of labor illustrated. The market supply of labor in a
society where the standard of living is but slightly above the level
of living is illustrated in Fig. 15-1. It shows that the amount of
labor offered first increases as the wage is increased from a low
level; then, as the wage approaches and passes that needed to
bring the level of living up to the standard of living, further increases in wage rates lead to decreases in the amount of labor
offered.
The market supply of labor in a society where the standard of
living if high and well above the actual level of living is illustrated
in Fig. 15-2. It shows that the amount of labor offered increases
with increases in the wage rate throughout the relevant range of
wages. Obviously at some wage the curve would change from a
positively to a negatively inclined curve, but this wage is much
higher than is relevant to the situation described.
The supply of labor to the individual firm operating in a competitive labor market is illustrated in Fig. 15-3. It shows that the firm

178

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

can hire as many or as few workers as it wishes without producing
any finite change in the going wage rate.
Wage

Wage

Wage

W

Number of labor
hours offered

FIG.

15-1

Number of labor
hours offered

FIG.

15-2

Number of labor
hours offered

FIG.

15-3

The demand for labor services. The demand for labor is a derived demand. It is derived from the demand for the goods and
services produced with the use of labor. The demand for labor by
an employer at a given moment of time is determined (a) by what
labor contributes to the output of the firm, that is, by its productivity, and (b) by what the firm receives for its output in the
market.
Because the productivity of labor applied to a given amount of
capital, land, and management obeys the law of diminishing marginal productivity, the demand for labor by any one firm usually
shows an inverse relationship between wage rates and the number
of workers hired. The higher the wage, the fewer workers hired,
and vice versa.
The combination of the demands for labor from all of the firms
in the market represents the market demand for labor. The interaction between the market demand for labor and the market supply
of labor produces a single equilibrium wage rate (under the assumptions of our analysis). This wage rate is just equal to the marginal productivity of labor, measured in terms of money. All
workers would get this rate.
WAGE DIFFERENTIALS

The assumptions of our present model do not require any such
extreme oversimplification as this. We shall recognize that even in
a purely competitive market there will be wage differentials which
will be either equalizing or real. The balance of this chapter will

DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

179

be devoted to explaining the reasons for these two types of differentials and also for geographical wage differentials, which in turn
may be either equalizing or real.
Equalizing differences. Workers do not choose their jobs exclusively on the basis of money wage rates. Many other considerations are important. Some jobs can be entered into at a very early
age, and maximum skills can be quickly mastered. Others require
long and expensive training before earnings begin. Still others are
irregular, or seasonal, in nature, or involve physical risks or the
nervous strain of making decisions and directing others. Again
there may be differences in the social prestige attached to different
types of work. Given these differences, and assuming that young
people were as capable of mastering one job as another, differences
in money wage rates would emerge which would be exclusively
equalizing in nature. If doctors earned more per hour than ditch
diggers, it would be because of the longer and more expensive
training involved. An equalizing wage differential is a difference
which is necessary to make the total satisfactions derived from different jobs equal.
The forces responsible for equalizing differences. If doctors
received no more than ditch diggers over their working lives, consumers would have to get along with very little medical service.
If there were no premium for dangerous work, or irregular work,
the products or services which involved risks of these sorts might
not be produced at all. The appearance on the market of even
small quantities of such goods would indicate the presence in the
labor force of a few people who preferred the jobs, despite the disadvantages. But if consumers placed a high valuation on the products involved, the individuals producing them would not have to
accept the same money wages as those working in fields where
these disadvantages were absent. The competitive bids of managers would drive up money wages in these occupations. As a result, individuals who had hitherto been deterred from entering
them would offer their services. The economy would not be in
long-run equilibrium until market forces had established the precise differences in money wages needed to maintain indefinitely
the appropriate number of workers in each and every line of work.
If workers were highly mobile, completely interchangeable, and
if there were no costs involved in shifting from one occupation to
another, or from one place to another, then all money wage differentials would be equalizing in origin, and the real satisfactions
obtainable from wages would be equal throughout the market.

180

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

Real differences. But complete interchangeability of workers is
not a necessary assumption of our hypothetical model. Just as we
recognized persistent locational and fertility differences in the land
supply, so now we shall recognize persistent innate differences in
the individuals making up the work force. We shall assume here,
and in accordance with conditions in the real world, that individuals differ from one another with respect to physical strength, manual dexterity, keenness of eye, coordination, the speed and precision
of reactions, intelligence, ambition, self-control, reliability, and
other qualities too numerous to mention. These differences in innate and acquired qualities will produce money wages that are real,
not equalizing.
Some of these wage differentials will be temporary, whereas others will be permanent.
Forces responsible for temporary real differences. The managers
of firms bid for workers, for land, and for savings. They put them
to work, and in the process they adapt and specialize the men, the
land, and savings. The upper limits of their bids are fixed by the
prices they expect to get for their products and the contributions
they expect to get from the last unit of each type of resource used
in their production. The lower limits are set by what they must
pay to get land, labor, and capital from their competitors. Given
competition from the side of the firms and from the side of resource owners, the maximum and minimum bids of the firms tend
to coincide in a single market price for identical capital goods, for
lands of equal excellence, and for workers of equal skill.
These market prices depend upon the relative quantities of the
specialized units. If firms discover that they can buy or hire certain kinds of capital goods and hire workers with certain skills, and
rent or buy specific plots of land, all at the going rates, and make
handsome profits, they will endeavor to secure more of these specialized resources. This will result in a rise in their prices. If these
resources can be increased, owners will gain only a temporary differential advantage which will decline and finally disappear. These
short-run rewards are frequently referred to as quasi-rents. They
may go to the owners of specialized capital goods as above normal
rates of interest, or to specialized workers as above normal wages.
They last only until such time as new resources can be brought in.
In the long-run, the owners of specialized capital goods all get
the rate of reward determined by the prevailing rate of time preference and the marginal productivity of capital. In the case of
specific plots of land the differential will also disappear to the ex-

DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

181

tent that it is possible to shift lands from other and less profitable
uses. But after this shifting has been completed there will still be
those persistent differences in rents which result from the immobility of land (site differentials) and from innate physical differences (fertility differentials).
In the case of specialized labor, as in the case of land, the differential will persist unless it is possible for other workers to acquire the skills that are in relatively short supply. If a long period
of training is needed, the differential may last for a considerable
period of time. Moreover, the differential may have to be substantial in order to induce less-well-paid workers to undergo the
expense of the specialized training, and the loss of earnings during
the period of training. If, however, there are no institution barriers
to entry into the high paid jobs, the rates will eventually fall to
those prevailing for jobs requiring comparable skills and comparable expenses of training. If the rates remain relatively high after
this shifting has occurred, the differential is to be explained as an
equalizing difference; or a permanent rent of ability difference; or
some combination of the two.
Forces responsible for permanent real differentials. Persistent
and real differentials in wages are due to the different personal
traits described earlier and to the fact that these traits are distributed very unevenly in any working population. Their relative abundance is unknown, but this is unimportant. Market forces produce
the appropriate responses. The competition of firms for the services
of individuals possessing rare combinations of useful qualities assures these persons of high rewards. The wages of all workers
bringing a given combination of qualities to the labor market will
tend to be equal. If the number of a group possessing this combination is small relative to the composite demand of the firms, the
importance of each individual in the group will be great and all
will command a high wage. Competition will equalize wages
within the group but will not reduce them. It is the inherent scarcity of the qualities involved and not the social deserts of the individual workers that is responsible for the high wage. In this respect
many wage differentials are due to the same forces that give rise
to the permanent differences in the rents of different plots of land.
For this reason these persistent real wage differentials are frequently spoken of as "rents of ability."

182

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION
GEOGRAPHICAL WAGE DIFFERENTIALS

The discussion of real and equalizing differences in wages up to
this point has dealt with the problem with some allowance for time
but with no allowance for space. In the real world we discover that
there are persistent and pronounced differences in the wages paid
for similar work in different countries and in different parts of the
same country. These differentials have given rise to a great deal
of discussion among economists and to a great deal of legislation.
It seems advisable therefore to say something more at this point
regarding the forces responsible for geographical wage differentials
and for the function they play in bringing an economy into longrun equilibrium.
In societies based on private property and on rewards in accordance with what individuals contribute to the national effort directly
through their personal services, or indirectly through the capital and
land in their possession, the resulting output will be shared not according to need, or to social worth, or to membership in the right
club or the right party, but purely and simply in accordance with
the relative scarcity of the various factors of production. If natural
resources are abundant, relative to the labor and capital, as was
long the case in the United States, the rent element will be small,
and the lion's share of the output will go to workers and savers in
the form of high wages and high interest. If, within the factor
labor, certain useful capacities are available in relative abundance
while others are extremely scarce, then a relatively large share
of the wage component will go to those who possess the scarce
capacities. 2
The forces responsible for geographical differentials. Geographi-

cal wage differentials are thus due to the fact that the factor mix,
or, in more elegant terms, the'proportionalityof factors, differs from
place to place. Where labor is the relatively scarce factor, the wage
will be relatively high; where it is the relatively abundant factor,
the wage will be relatively low.
2

In China, India, and in many parts of Africa, Central and South America, population is the abundant and increasing factor, with unskilled workers predominating
within the labor group, while natural resources and, still more, capital and knowhow are the scarce elements. Consequently within these economies, the pure rate of
interest tends to be high, land owners absorb an important fraction of the total output, while labor gets a relatively small share, and the portion going to the individual
unskilled worker is so close to the biological minimum necessary to sustain life that
even a small dislocation in the productive processes leads to an immediate rise in the
death rate.

DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

183

The resulting geographical wage differentials may be equalizing
or real, or a combination of the two. Equalizing differences tend
to be due to local differences in costs of living, or to sentimental,
racial, religious, or other factors (for example, cost of movement
and loss of income while moving) which make persons with given
skills feel that they are as well off where they are as they would
be where their particular skills command a higher price. The test
of an equalizing differential is that it does not give rise to a tendency for workers to move from one area to another. Real geographical differentials, on the other hand, are differences of a magnitude that not only makes persons of given skills working in one
area feel that they would be better off if they moved to another
area but would, in the absence of external restraints (immigration
laws, for example), induce at least some of them to migrate. The
persistence of real geographical wage differentials are thus due to
the insufficient geographical mobility of labor.
This statement must be qualified to allow for the costs of movement. A real differential may exist but may not be sufficient to
justify the cost of moving from a low- to a high-wage area. Thus
if the cost of movement for a man with a family is $1,000 and the
geographical wage differential is 2$ an hour, it would probably be
uneconomical for the man to move even though the cost of living
in the two areas was the same. Assuming an interest rate of 5%,
the man would assume a permanent interest charge of $50 a year
on the $1,000 moving cost but would earn only $40 a year more
(assuming a work year of 2,000 hours).
The function of geographical differentials. Relatively high geo-

graphical immobility of labor will slow down but it will not stop
the operation of the market forces that tend constantly to reduce
real geographical wage differentials. Geographical movements of
capital are as effective an equalizing force as are population movements and, on the whole, they would appear to be more humane.
They occur because low wage areas are attractive to firms that can
make effective use of an abundant local labor supply. Unless governments interfere, capital movements will continue until the real
differential has disappeared. An important function of real geographical wage differentials in an enterprise economy is to promote
geographical movements of capital with a view to reducing the
need for people to move.
In our hypothetical economy of pure competition real locational
wage differentials will not exist. Capital movements and population movements would have eliminated them in the dynamic period

184

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

preceding the attainment of long-run equilibrium. Consequently
all workers performing work involving comparable skills will be receiving equal real rates of wages. Equalizing differentials will persist. They involve no social problems since their existence is necessary to the realization of equal real wages for equal work.3
SUMMARY
We have now completed our explanation of the way in which
consumer spending in an isolated and stationary economy determines the pattern of production and the division of the product
among resource owners. The general level of money wages will depend upon the amount of money with which our hypothetical economy is supplied. Whether the common labor rate is W an hour or
$10 an hour is of no importance, since the prices of the things the
worker buys will be correspondingly low or high. The fraction of
the total annual output going to wage earners will depend upon
the proportionality of the factors in the economy. If labor is the
relatively scarce factor, the wage component in the social income
will be relatively large. Again, the division of the wage component
among wage earners will depend upon the relative scarcity or
abundance of the productively useful qualities they bring to the
labor market and upon their geographical locations in the market.
Those possessing qualities that are scarce relative to the demand
for them will command high wages, while those who can only offer,
or are only willing to offer, services that are relatively abundant
will get low wages. In an attempt to maximize his real personal
income each worker will offer that combination of the qualities he
possesses which brings him the highest rate of return. Those able
to offer relatively scarce combinations will receive higher real wages
than those who can offer only combinations that are relatively
abundant. These higher real wages, in so far as they are due to
innate differences and not to expensive training, are in the nature
of personal "rents" and are due to the same forces that "impute"
higher returns to superior tracts of land.
Many of the wage differentials are equalizing, rather than real. Differentials that reflect differences in risks, in irregularities in employment, in social prestige, etc., within groups of workers who are able
to perform the required services, will be of this type. Geographical
3

This point is stressed here because, as will be shown later, the interventions of
most modern governments in the labor and welfare fields have the effect of blocking
the market forces which work toward the geographical equalization of wages. The
interventions are alleged to be in the interests of the poor, whereas in fact they help
higher paid workers at the expense of lower paid workers.

DISTRIBUTION: WAGES

185

differentials that reflect differences in costs of living will also be
equalizing in character. In general, and because of the tendency
of land rents and local taxes to vary directly with the size of communities, and because of the additional time required for workers
in big cities to get to their places of work, money wages for comparable combinations of qualities will vary directly with community
size. When the economy reaches long-run equilibrium, all size-ofcommunity differentials will be equalizing. Within single communities there will be both equalizing and real differentials.
The explanation offered in this and the three preceding chapters
of the forces that allocate the social output among resource owners
does not claim to prove that the resulting personal distribution of
the output is the best and most equitable distribution possible. No
one knows what would be the most equitable distribution. That
is a matter on which each one of us has to make up his own mind.
It is a question of social values and social sympathies, as well as
personal judgments regarding how individuals would act, as producers and consumers, if the magnitude of their claims as consumers were divorced from the magnitude of their contributions to the
social output as workers, as owners of land, and as savers. A good
deal more will be said in later chapters about the problem of "social
justice."
In these chapters it has been shown how the price mechanism
solves the problem of production and distribution in an isolated
and stationary economy. In the next three chapters the effects of
certain market imperfections will be examined.

Questions:
1. Illustrate by diagram and by simple arithmetic examples the shape
of the market supply curve for labor in (a) a country in which the
standard of living is above the prevailing level of living and (b) in
a country in which the reverse holds true.
2. Define the demand for labor and illustrate by diagram and by simple
arithmetic examples (a) the shape of the market demand curve for
labor and (b) the shape of the demand curve facing the individual
firm, assuming pure competition.
3. Workers frequently prefer unemployment to a cut in wages that provides less than what they regard as necessary to maintain their standards of living. What effect is this attitude likely to have on the real
wages of workers in the short-run? Is there any reason to believe
that the long-run effects may be different?

186

MARKET ECONOMY UNDER PURE COMPETITION

4. What is the difference between real and equalizing differences in
wages and what conditions would have to be satisfied for market
forces to make all money wage differentials equalizing?
5. Give examples of (a) real wage differentials which tend over time to
be eliminated by competition, and (b) real wage differentials which
cannot be eliminated by competition.
6. Identify the factors which appear to be primarily responsible for
the persistence of real wage differentials.
7. What effect does publicly supported education have on real wage
differentials?
8. Define geographical wage differentials and identify forces that are
responsible for equalizing geographical differences and those that
are responsible for real geographical differentials.
9. What effects have (a) good roads and cheap automobiles and (b)
protective tariffs had on geographical wage differentials?
10. Argue for or against the proposition that competitive market forces,
in and of themselves, tend to narrow geographical wage differentials.
11. Argue for or against the proposition that, from a strictly ethical
point of view, it is more difficult to justify large wage differentials
going to workers of exceptional abilities than it is to justify geographical differences in wages going to workers of equal abilities.

PART THREE

The Market Economy under Lessthan-purely Competitive
Conditions

16
The Behavior of Prices

_LN CHAPTER 6 markets were classified as purely competitive and less than purely competitive. Less
than purely competitive markets were, in turn, classified in terms of
the relationships of the firms to the buyers of their outputs or to
the suppliers of the resources needed for their production programs. The terms monopoly, duopoly, and oligopoly were used to
describe markets in which there are respectively one, two, or a few
sellers of standardized products. The terms monopsony, duopsony,
and oligopsony refer to markets in which there are respectively one,
two, or a few buyers of resources. The competition in a market is
said to be monopolistic when there are many sellers, each differentiating his product or products from those of his rivals by such devices as advertising, special packaging, special services, etc.
Monopsonistic competition describes market situations in which resource owners offer their resources to firms on other than strictly
price considerations.
Preliminary remarks. If, as is often claimed, very few market situations are purely competitive, why did we start with an account
of the behavior of firms in such markets? First of all, some markets
do approximate the conditions of pure competition. The material
in Part Two can contribute to our understanding of these markets.
Second, the method of analysis used there can be used, with modifications, for the study of less than purely competitive markets.
But most important, competitive market behavior provides standards by which to judge the results of noncompetitive practices.
Pure competition provides a standard. These standards are derived from the picture of an economy in general long-run equilibrium. Every firm is of optimum size, profits and losses are zero,
market price is equal to marginal cost, and both of these are equal
189

190

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

to minimum total average unit cost. Under these conditions resources are being used with maximum effectiveness; consumers are
getting each good and service at the minimum sacrifice of other
goods and services. The national income is maximized and goes to
owners of resources in accordance with the importance of the contributions which their resources make to total production.
We propose now to examine the behavior of firms in less than
purely competitive markets with these standards in mind. We shall
find that noncompetitive behavior, when viewed in the framework
of an isolated and stationary economy, with unchanging consumer
tastes and production techniques, compares very unfavorably with
competitive behavior. But when we turn to the study of a growing
and dynamic economy, we shall find that the task of rating the
performance of firms is not simple and clear cut. Many less than
purely competitive markets may actually produce results that are
preferable to those to be expected under pure competition.
Similarities with pure competition. Before discussing the rational
output and price policy for a firm operating under conditions of
less than pure competition, two general observations are in order.
First, the management of a firm, regardless of whether it is in a
competitive or a noncompetitive position, must solve the problem
of plant size or capacity. We maintain the assumption that there
is an optimum size, and that self-interest, even in the absence of
effective competition, suffices to induce the management to continue to assemble resources until this size has been reached. Second, the objective of management is the maximization of profits,
exactly as in the case of pure competition. This means that management must compare unit costs of production at various outputs
with unit selling prices at these outputs. In general, therefore,
there will be one output (the problem of capacity or size of plant
already having been solved) which will be most profitable, in the
sense that the unit surplus over unit cost multiplied by the number
of units sold yields the largest possible total surplus. Up to this point
the problem confronting the firm is exactly the same as that of a
firm operating under pure competition. In the case of monopoly,
duopoly, oligopoly, and monopolistic competitions, the differences
arise entirely from the side of demand. In the case of monopsony,
duopsony, oligopsony, and monopsonistic competition, the differences arise from the side of supply.
Differences. Most of the situations involving monopoly and its
variants have one thing in common which did not exist in the case
of pure competition. Firms no longer see the demand for their

191

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

products as infinitely elastic. Each one knows that any change in
its output will provoke a change in market price, upward or downward, according as supply is reduced or increased. Consequently
a firm now has to consider not only the effects on its costs of any
change in its output, but also the effect of this change on its total
revenues.
Demand as seen by the seller. The firm can no longer assume
that an increased output, of say 10 units, can be sold at the old
price, and thus bring in additional revenues equal to 10 times the
unit selling price. It must reckon with the necessity of selling at
a lower price not only the ten additional units but also the units it
could have sold at the higher price, had it decided not to increase
output. Hence the net advantage consists of the difference between what it gains by selling more units and the loss per unit on
the old output due to the necessity of selling it at the lower price.
This difference between total revenue at one output, and total
revenue at the next possible larger output, is known as the firm's
marginal revenue.
Marginal revenue. Table 16-1 illustrates the difference in the
character of the demand facing a firm according as it operates
within or without the field of pure competition.
A firm operating under conditions of pure competition expects
to increase its total revenues by the full amount of the market price
TABLE

16-1

DEMAND AS SEEN BY A FIRM

Operating under
Pure Competition

Operating outside Field

of Pure Competition

Out- Unit Sellput ing price

Total
Revenue

Marginal
Revenue

Unit selling price

Total
Revenue

Marginal
Revenue

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

1.00
.99
.98
.97
.96
.95
.94
.93
.92
.91

1.00
1.98
2.94
3.88
4.80
5.70
6.58
7.44
8.28
9.10

1.00
.98
.96
.94
.92
.90
.88
.86
.84
.82

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

192

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

of the added output; the firm operating outside this area knows
that it must sell all its output at a lower price, and that the price
will be lower because of its decision to expand output. Consequently the profitability of the expansion will depend on the relationship of the added cost to the added revenue, and not upon the
relationship either to the old market price or to the new market
price.
The situation confronting the two firms can be illustrated diagramatically as shown in Figs. 16-1 and 16-2. In Fig. 16-1 the horiDollar's

Dollars

$1.00

AR
$1.00
MR

0

5
Sales per time period

FIG. 16-1

10

AR
MR

C)

5

10

Sales per time period

FIG. 16-2

zontal straight line is the familiar curve of infinite elasticity. It
illustrates at one and the same time the behavior of market price
as the firm expands output from 1 to 10 units, and the added revenue per unit secured by the firm as a result of the expansion of
output. We may designate the curve, therefore, as the firm's average revenue curve AR and its marginal revenue curve MR. One
test of pure competition is that the AR and MR curves shall coincide.
In Fig. 16-2 the AR curve slopes downward and to the right because of the necessity the firm is under of lowering price in order
to increase sales. The broken line is the MR curve. It is calculated
from the data regarding total revenue at every possible output and
is based on the figures in the last column of Table 16-1. It is less
elastic than the AR curve.
The output decision. As noted before, the proper policy for a
firm is to adjust output in such a fashion that marginal cost equals
marginal revenue. Since price to the competitive firm is always
equal to marginal revenue, the optimum rate of output for such a
firm is found where MC — P. The marginal revenue to the noncompetitive firm is always less than market price P. Hence the generalized profit-maximization rule MC = MR is the only one
applicable in such cases.

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

193

Whether the resulting scale of operations permits short-run profits
will depend on the demand-and-cost relationship confronting the
firm. Whether short-run profits, if any, will persist will depend on
the ease with which new firms can enter the industry. If entry is
impossible or very difficult, profits and a relatively inefficient use of
resources will result. If entry is relatively easy, profits may disappear, but there will still be a relative misuse of resources.
MONOPOLY
A firm possesses a monopoly when it is the exclusive producer of
a good or service for which there is no close substitute. In principle
such a firm behaves no differently from a firm that is simply one of
many producing a completely standardized product. Each tries to
maximize profits; each finds it profitable to expand output as long
as the dollars earned by producing and selling more units exceed
the dollars expended in producing and selling the added units.
Thus a firm can maximize profits only by continuing to expand output until added cost MC equals added revenues MR. The competitive firm does this by equating its marginal cost to the prevailing
price. The monopolist, however, as the sole producer, has greater
freedom of action. He has two alternatives. He can set a price and
then prodace all that can be sold at that price; or he can adopt a
production schedule and then sell the output at the price the consumers are prepared to pay. The one thing he cannot do is control
both price and quantity He must choose. In either case his purpose is to maximize his profits. He does this by equating his marginal costs to his marginal revenue.
Whether the search for maximum profits leads the firm to stop
output short of, or to push it beyond the low point L on its ATC
curve, will depend to a considerable extent on the level and the
elasticity of its average revenue curve and on the behavior of its
unit costs as output expands. In general, firms operating outside
the area of pure competition will not operate at the outputs at
which competitive firms operate.
A diagrammatic restatement. The diagrams in Figs. 16-3 and 16-4
illustrate two possible output and price situations under monopoly.
In Fig. 16-3 the MR curve intersects the MC curve at A. A line
drawn vertically through A intersects the AR curve at D, the ATC
curve at B, and the OX axis at S. OS represents the appropriate
output, from the point of view of the monopolist; OP (equal to SD)
is the price per unit at which this output can be sold; OC (equal to
SB) is the average cost per unit. Total cost is thus OS times OC

194
Dollars

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

MC

and is represented by the rectangle
OSBC, while the total revenues of
the firm are OS times OP. Monopoly profit per unit is CP (equal to
BD), and total monopoly profit is
represented by the rectangle CBDP.
If output were increased from S to
S', average cost would fall from SB
SS'
to S'L, because of the bringing into
Sales per time period
use
of idle capacity. This expanFIG. 16-3
sion, however, would reduce the
firm's profits, since marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue at all
outputs beyond S. Consequently, the monopolist has every incentive not to expand beyond S. Nor can he gain by restricting production short of S.
The only way in which the monopolist could avoid the waste of
unused capacity would be to operate with a smaller overhead—with
less elaborate and expensive machines, for example. But in this
event his average cost would be still higher, and he would then find
it profitable to operate beyond normal capacity. This inability to
adjust overhead exactly is due to the indivisibility of the resources
making up overhead. Two assembly lines in an automobile plant
may represent an inadequate investment, but a third line may result
in an overinvestment. Technical considerations force the firm to
choose. The assumption here is that the management has chosen to
go somewhat too far, rather than to stop a little short, with the result that it will normally have a
certain amount of idle capacity. Dollars
MC
ATC
This gives flexibility, permits it to
meet unexpected fluctuations in
c
consumer demand, and serves as
MR
a deterrent to outsiders who might
be tempted to enter the field.
Figure 16-4 illustrates the second typical situation. Here the
S'S
demand is such that the MR curve
Sales per time period
intersects the MC curve above
FIG. 16-4
and to the right of the low point
L on the ATC curve. The firm's
profits are substantial, and it pushes output well beyond what would
be the long-run normal capacity point for a firm in a competitive
field.
ATC

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

195

DUOPOLY AND OLIGOPOLY
WITH STANDARDIZED PRODUCTS

Can competition protect consumers in a situation in which there
are two (duopoly) or more firms, but so few (oligopoly) that there
are no serious technical difficulties in the way of the adoption of a
common output and price policy by the group? The protection
would not be complete unless the competition resulted in the emergence of a price which just covered the minimum average total unit
costs of the firms. But the firms, acting individually, are not likely
to push output to the low points on their total cost curves, unless
each regards the prevailing price as a datum, i.e., as something
given and beyond its control. In fact, it is quite unlikely that the
firms will make the assumption that their own outputs have nothing
to do with the market price. The demand curves confronting the
firms will not be regarded by them as horizontal. Each will try to
anticipate the behavior of the others. Each will realize that an increase in output, as a consequence of its own decision, will result in
a fall in market price, and a loss in revenue on all units hitherto
sold at the higher price. Under these circumstances self-interest,
without the necessity of any secret understanding, may lead all of
the firms to restrict output. The result could be an equilibrium with
each firm producing to the scale at which marginal cost equals marginal revenue. All firms would be making profits, and yet they
would all hesitate to expand for fear of spoiling the market. Consumers, getting less than would be the case in a competitive market
and paying more, would not be fully protected.
The existence of excess capacity tempts each firm to seek extra
business. Rather than resort to direct price competition, however,
firms may try such tactics as price discrimination, i.e., selling to
buyers at different prices, secret rebates, etc. Each seeks to take
customers from its competitors without reducing prices to its own
customers. The chances are large, however, that in such situations
the firms will eventually be merged under one management, which
takes us back to the monopoly situation discussed earlier, or that an
agreement (collusion) will bring about a still less satisfactory situation.
DUOPOLY AND OLIGOPOLY WITH
PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION

Another possibility is that the firms will attempt to mitigate the
severity of competition through product differentiation. This is

196

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

much more likely to occur in the case of consumer goods than of

producer goods. The diversified tastes of consumers and their suggestibility make it possible for firms to manipulate their own
demand schedules. Firms will spend immense sums to convince buyers of the peculiar merits of products which, in fact, are extraordinarily similar in their serviceability. Millions of dollars are spent
annually in extolling the merits of four cigarettes which many
smokers cannot distinguish one from another. With the aid of
brand names and trade marks, soaps, perfumes, gasolines, foods,
patent medicines, shoes, shirts, suits, razor blades, to mention only
a few consumer goods, are constantly pushed. Advertising itself has
become big business. One of its major purposes is to create "consumer loyalties," to increase the demand for a product, i.e., to shift
the demand curve to the right and at the same time make it less
elastic. Decreasing the elasticity of the demand curve means that
small changes in price, upward or downward, will have little effect
on the quantity that can be sold.
The efforts of firms to take business away from one another
through competitive advertising appears to be much less resented,
and hence much less likely to provoke retaliation, than competition
through price reductions. And there may be a very good reason for
this. Price reductions may or may not bring in new clients. Advertising, on the other hand, brings in, or at any rate the managements
of the firms in the industry appear to believe that it brings in, an
entirely new clientele. Thus all the firms in an oligopolistic industry
may benefit by the lavish advertising of any one firm. The latter
may actually complain if his competitors refuse to do a reasonable
amount of advertising.
The more firms advertise, the more expensive it becomes to buy
them out, or to induce them to limit their sales effort to only a part
of the market area covered by their advertising. In this sense advertising promotes the maintenance of competition by making
mergers or collusive agreements more difficult to arrange.
But advertising also makes the entry of new firms more difficult.
A firm that engages in national advertising must be able to supply
its customers in every hamlet in the land. For a country like the
United States, this requires an enormous annual output. Branch
plants may have to be established in various parts of the country,
unless the economies of size at the plant level are large enough to
offset the costs of shipping to distant markets.
Thus even in situations in which the cost of establishing a plant
of optimum size is small, the initial outlay for advertising and the

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

197

possibility of having to establish branch plants make entry costly.
National advertising appears to have shifted many industries into
the category of oligopolistic industries. The decline of the number
of firms in the cigarette industry provides a demonstration of the
power of advertising.
To conclude, duopoly and oligopoly are likely to end up in mergers, collusive agreements, or in competition between giant firms in
which special emphasis is laid on advertising and on the provision
of special services to customers rather than on price, pure and
simple. Such at least is the conclusion which many economists draw
from the theory of oligopolistic pricing presented in this section.
MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
Monopolistic competition differs from oligopolistic competition
with product differentiation in the sense that in the former the
entry of new firms is relatively easy. Otherwise the tactics are
much the same. Firms compete with one another by trying to convince consumers that their products are somehow different from
those of other firms in the same industry. Each firm is supposed to
build up thereby a fragile element of monopoly and to gain a slight
immunity from the steady "gale of competition" to which firms in
the field of pure and perfect competition are exposed. Most of the
examples of monopolistic competition given in economics textbooks
and in the scientific journals are taken from the retailing fieldgrocery stores, drug stores, gasoline filling stations, department
stores, etc.
Its alleged wastefulness. This behavior of firms is criticized as
wasteful. It is said to distort competition. Instead of vying for the
consumers' dollars by offering more standardized products for less,
the firms waste money in advertising, in packaging, in servicing, and
in adding gadgets that contribute little to the real welfare of consumers. This kind of competition is said to be particularly hard on
the poor. They are supposed to want more solid, substantial, utilitarian and standardized products and lower prices. What the firms
cater to is the whims of the well-to-do and the weaknesses of the
poor, and in the process the very multiplicity of goods and services
turned out prevents firms from securing the potential economies of
size. Nonetheless the competition may be quite severe enough to
wipe out the persistent profits that characterize the fields of monopoly and monopolistic competition.
The diagrams in Figs. 16-5 and 16-6 illustrate the alleged differ-

198

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

ence in the end results of monopoly and oligopoly (Fig. 16-5) and
of monopolistic competition (Fig. 16-6).
Figure 16-5 is the same as Fig. 16-4. The firm is operating beyond
its most efficient scale of output and is making substantial profits
because new firms cannot or dare not enter the field. Figure 16-6
Dollars
^.
P --^VT

D

/

A7

Dollars

"C

c
V.- —

S'S
Sales per time period
FIG.

16-5

Sales per time period
FIG.

16-6

depicts the situation in an industry in which entry is comparatively
easy and in which competition works through product differentiation. The AR curve is tangent to the ATUC curve at a point directly above the intersection of the firm's MC and MR curves.
Total costs are just covered, profits have disappeared, but nonetheless the firm is operating well short of its most economical output,
viewed from the side of costs. Yet it would lose money if it expanded, since this would raise costs above marginal revenue.
Considerable surplus capacity is tied up in firms operating in the
field of monopolistic competition.
MONOPSONY, DUOPSONY, AND OLIGOPSONY
The situations dealt with in this section arise from departures
from pure competition in the markets in which firms buy or hire
resources. We now drop the assumption that the firms take the
prices which they must pay for resources as given, i.e., as prices
which will prevail regardless of their output decisions. Consequently, we can no longer assume that the supply curve confronting
the individual firm is a horizontal straight line.
We here assume that the firms under examination are of such
size, relative to the markets in which they buy or hire resources,
that their output decisions will affect the prices they have to pay
for resources. A contraction of output will result in a decrease in
the demand for a resource (or a group of resources), and this de-

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

199

crease in demand will, in turn, force all owners of the resource (or
resources) involved to take less, in order that all of their resources
may be employed. Conversely, and for the same reason, an expansion of output will result in an increase in demand for, and a rise
in the price of, the resource (or resources) involved. This assumption is tantamount to saying that the supply curves confronting the
firms slope upward and to the right.
Just as one test of pure competition is the existence of infinitely
elastic supply and demand curves, as these are seen from the point
of view of the individual firm, and just as one test of the conditions
discussed in the preceding sections of this chapter was the existence
of individual demand curves which sloped downward and to the
right, so here one test is the existence of rising supply curves. These
rising supply curves are due to imperfections in the markets in
which the firms buy or hire these resources.
Illustrations. The resources employed by the firms are land, concrete capital goods, savings, and labor. Specialization and lack of
equally remunerative alternative employments are essential conditions giving rise to monopsony, duopsony, and oligopsony.
Coal mines represent a specialized type of land. Monopsony or
oligopsony in this industry will reduce the value of lands containing
coal deposits and permit the coal mining firms to lease or purchase
such lands on more favorable terms than would otherwise be possible.
In similar fashion an oligopsonistic coal industry may be able to
drive down the price of specialized mining equipment if, during a
preceding period, the demand for such machinery had brought into
existence more capacity than is now required to satisfy the reduced
demand. As long as price more than covers average variable costs,
the firms manufacturing coal mining equipment have no recourse.
Only after the disappearance of excess capacity can the surviving
firms cover all their costs.
Savings, on the other hand, represent unspecialized capital and
as such are highly mobile. For this reason the output decisions of
a given firm or industry can exercise little influence on the rate of
interest. For the firm or industry this particular supply curve is infinitely elastic. At any given time the rate remains the same regardless of the amount borrowed, and a change in rate does not affect
the price paid on earlier loans.
The situation is different when it comes to hiring labor. If conditions in a particular labor market are such that a decision to expand
requires the offering of a higher wage in order to attract additional

200

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

workers, all existing wage contracts have to be revised. Managements know that they cannot for long pay two different rates to
men doing similar work within a single plant. The maintenance of
labor morale requires an early upward revision of the old contract.
This fact forces management to "impute" to the added workers
not merely the added outlays involved in their wages, but all of
the added outlays needed to bring the wages of the old workers up
to the new level.1
Under this line of reasoning it can be shown that collective bargaining or a minimum wage law that raised the average wage, and
hence total wage costs, might nonetheless increase the number of
workers the firm would employ. This surprising result would be
due to the fact that the firm was now confronted with a horizontal
and not a rising labor supply curve.
A numerical illustration. Table 16-2 illustrates the problem confronting a firm that is buying labor services monopsonistically.
Columns (1) and (2) represent the supply schedule of labor servTABLE

16-2

MONOPSONISTIC MARKET FOR RESOURCES

(1)

(2)

No. of Wage per
Workers
Week

(3)

(4)

Total
Outlay

Marginal
Outlay

10

$50

$500

11

51

561

12

52

624

13

53

689

14

54

756

15

55

825

(5)

(6)

Marginal Marginal Outlay
Revenue
under Union
Product
Contract

$61

$68

$60

63

64

60

65

60

60

67

56

60

69

50

60

1
More than this, upward revision of any category of wages may shortly require
an upward revision of the entire plant wage structure, from the unskilled entrance
wage right through to top plant salaries. This is due to the role played by custom
in the thinking of workers. An existing pattern of wage differentials quickly comes
to be regarded as "right and fair." The upward revision of the wage rate applicable
to any single job classification opens up the possibility that comparable adjustments
may have to be made in all the other rates.

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

201

ices confronting the firm. It shows, for example, that a weekly wage
of $50 would suffice to bring 10 workers to the firm, but that a wage
of $51 would be needed to bring 11 workers to the firm. Column
(3) shows the total outlay on wages at each of the possible levels
of employment. Column (4) shows the increase in total outlay on
wages per unit increase in employment. Thus, to hire 12 rather
than 11 workers the firm must increase its outlay on wages by $63
—this in spite of the fact that each of the twelve workers is paid but
$52 a week. The difference arises out of the fact that each of the
eleven workers who could have been hired for $51 a week must
also be paid the $52 needed to attract the 12th worker.
Column (5) shows the increase in the revenues of the firm per
unit increase in employment; this increase is known as marginal
revenue product. It shows, for example, that the revenues of the
firm will be greater by $64 if it hires 12 rather than 11 workers.
Column (6) will be explained later.
Common sense tells us that the firm should continue to add to its
work force so long as each added worker adds more to the revenues of the firm than to the outlays of the firm. Thus an eleventh
worker would add $68 to the revenues of the firm but only $61 to
the costs of the firm. A twelfth worker would add $64 to the revenues but only $63 to the costs of the firm. The firm should hire
twelve workers but no more since the hiring of a thirteenth worker
would add only $60 to the revenues of the firm but would add $65
to its costs. In other words, a rate of hiring of 12 workers represents
the equilibrium level of employment for the firm in the circumstances described here. The equilibrium wage is $52 per week, the
wage needed to attract 12 workers to the firm.
Now suppose that a union were to be organized and that, through
collective bargaining, the union and the company were to sign a
contract calling for a wage of $60 per week. Under this contract,
the added cost (marginal outlay) of hiring 12 rather than 11 workers would be $60 and not $63. This same marginal outlay would
confront the firm throughout the range of employment levels given
in the table, as shown in column (6). Applying the rule that the
firm should add to its work force until the addition of another
worker would add more to costs than to revenues, the new equilibrium level of employment for the firm would be 13 workers.
Thus, at the higher wage, the firm is actually hiring more rather
than less labor.
This does not mean that the firm will be "happy" about the new
arrangements. On the contrary, it will be in a worse profit-and-loss

202

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

position than before the organization of the union. However, it
would be in an even worse position if it refused to hire the thirteenth worker. The union has forced a redistribution of income
from the owners of the firm to the workers and, at the same time,
has increased the firm's demand for labor.
The relevance of this analysis to wage-employment problems in
the American economy will be discussed in Chapter 33. The thing
to note here is that this result requires the assumption that the
firm is buying labor monopsonistically and that the union asked for
only $60 and not some higher figure. Had the union demanded $65
a week, the firm would have reduced employment to 11 workers
rather than increased it to 13. In other words, this result is obtained
only under conditions where the firm is not buying resources competitively and only for wage changes within certain limits.
If the situations discussed in this chapter are widespread in the
American economy, it is obvious that the price mechanism will not
produce the optimum allocation of resources, will not maximize the
national income, and will not distribute it to factor owners on the
basis of their contributions. This view is widely held. We shall examine it after the discussion of collusion, the last of the noncompetitive situations mentioned at the outset of this chapter.
Questions:
1. Identify the departures from pure competition discussed in this
chapter.
2. Draw up two hypothetical demand schedules, one illustrating demand as seen by a firm confronted with pure competition in the
market in which it sells its output, the other illustrating demand as
seen by a firm selling in a less than purely competitive market. Illustrate the two situations graphically.
3. Do the same thing for firms confronted with pure and with less than
pure competition in the markets in which they buy or hire resources.
4. "When an industry expands output in the face of an unchanging
market demand, price has to fall regardless of the presence or absence of competition. Hence all the firms in the industry are confronted with the same loss of revenue on their former outputs. This
being so, the concept of marginal revenue has no practical significance." Define marginal revenue and defend the proposition that
the concept enables economists to derive conclusions that have practical usefulness. Illustrate by examples.

THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES

203

5. In general, firms which are sheltered from pure competition will not
operate at their normal capacities. Explain and illustrate diagrammatically.
6. In time oligopolistic competition is likely to result in monopoly, collusion, or cut-throat competition.
(a) Assuming that the first two avenues of escape are not available,
indicate other devices that firms may resort to to avoid cut-throat
competition, (b) Define the term cut-throat competition.
7. Argue for or against the following propositions:
(a) "Advertising promotes monopoly or oligopoly."
(b) "Monopolistic competition is socially wasteful."
(c) "Cutting prices is, of course, the most dangerous way to move
heavy inventories, but nonetheless it's being done."
8. Discuss the short- and the long-run effects of oligopsony on
(a) the market value of land that is serviceable only to the oligopsonistic firms;
(b) the firms specializing in producing the particular equipment
used by the oligopsonistic industry;
(c) the wages of the workers who depend exclusively on the oligopolistic industry for employment.
9. Is there any difference in the short- and the long-run effect on wages
and employment of a high minimum wage imposed on an industry
confronted with pure competition in its labor market and on one in
which the competition is oligopsonistic?
10. In the light of the analysis up to this point give a definition of "exploitation of labor" which you think the authors of this book would
accept.

17
Collugion

-LITERALLY, collusion means the
"act of playing together." In the course of time the idea of deceit
or fraud attached itself to the term. For our purposes collusion
means the act of agreeing on a common live-and-let-live policy by
legally independent and potentially competitive firms or organized
groups of resource owners or a combination of firms and resource
owners. The collusion may be legal or illegal, depending upon the
laws of the country concerned.

BUSINESS COLLUSION
Business collusion is usually due to the existence of surplus plant
capacity. This excess may be the result of the high profits of a
preceding period, which induced the entry of an excessive number
of new firms, or of ill-judged expansions by existing firms, or of an
unexpected decline in demand. Regardless of the cause, market
price falls below the low point on the ATC curves of the firms,
when all operate at normal capacity. Under pure competition the
wearing out of plant and the withdrawal of firms would finally remove the excess capacity. This is a painful process. If the number
of firms is small, the managements will be tempted to agree upon
a common policy of output restriction, with a view "to stabilizing
the industry."
The role of demand. The elasticity of demand plays an important
role here. If demand is relatively inelastic, a slight reduction of
output may result in a sufficient price rise to permit all of the firms
to cover or more than cover their costs, even though their unit costs
have also risen. If, on the other hand, demand is highly elastic, a
substantial restriction of output may be required, and this may
204

205

COLLUSION

force all firms to operate at such high points on their cost curves
as to negate the advantage of the price rise.
A diagrammatic illustration. The diagram (Fig. 17-1) illustrates
these two situations. D' and D" represent two industry demand
curves. At output OQ market price is OP, regardless of the shapes
of the two demand curves, and is below the costs of all the firms
in the industry. Accordingly an agreement is reached to cut output
back to OQ'. Each firm accepts a quota based upon its normal
capacity output. The price rises to OF or to OF\ according as the
demand is elastic or inelastic.
Dollars

Dollars

Q'
Q
Sales per time period

Sales Der time oeriod

FIG. 17-1

FIG. 17-2

Q'

Q Q"

Figure 17-2 illustrates the situation confronting a typical firm in
the industry. OP represents the market price which prevailed prior
to the agreement and OQ the firm's appropriate output. This price,
equal to marginal cost, exceeds its variable costs but falls short of
its total costs. OQ' represents its reduced "quota" output. OF
represents the resulting rise in price on the assumption that consumer demand is highly elastic; OP", the price if the demand is
relatively inelastic. Given the firm's cost schedule, it is obvious that
the cut-back can restore profits only if demand is reasonably inelastic.
Enforcing collusion. Inelastic demand thus increases the incentive for firms to "play together," but it also confronts them with
a very difficult enforcement problem. Each management knows
that it can increase its profits substantially by exceeding its quota,
provided the others comply. Thus the firm with the cost schedule
and the inelastic demand schedule shown in Fig. 17-2 would maximize its profits by expanding output to Q", if all the other firms
observed their quotas. At this output its marginal cost would equal

206

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

market price, and its profits would be substantial. (The assumption
here is that its excess production would slightly depress price.) But
if all the others do the same thing, the "bottom will drop out of the
market," and if, in the period of partial compliance, new firms had
entered, price will fall below the average variable costs of most of
the firms, and the industry will be completely demoralized. To
succeed, therefore, there must be some method of policing the
agreement. Experience shows that successful policing for any considerable length of time is impossible without active government
support.
Even though the original parties to the agreement can be kept in
line, the enormous potential profits to be had by a noncooperator
are likely in time to bring new firms and hence additional capacity
into the industry.1 This will either lead to the breakdown of the
agreement, or to the bringing in and according of quotas to the new
firms at the expense of the original members.2
Competition versus collusion. Frequently, the final result of a
collusive agreement is that all the firms in the agreement end up
operating so far short of their normal capacities and with such high
unit costs that all profits disappear. This outcome, in a sense, resembles that reached through pure competition, which also reduces
profits to zero. The social results, however, are very much less satisfactory. Instead of an industry in which all of the firms are operating at normal capacity and selling relatively large outputs at
prices that just cover minimum average total costs, a larger number
of firms, all operating below capacity, provide consumers with
smaller quantities at a higher price. The excess plant capacity and
the excess management tied up in these operations represent a
waste of valuable resources. Moreover the reduced employment
increases job applications in other and more competitive industries
and drives wages there to lower levels than would otherwise prevail. Thus collusive practices reduce the national income and increase the inequalities in its distribution.
Figure 17-3 illustrates the difference in the end results of these
two no-profit situations. Under pure and perfect competition con1
The increase of imports from abroad is almost certain to break down the agreement unless the government can be induced to increase tariffs and other obstacles to
international trade in the commodities involved. In a free-trade world collusion
would be almost impossible.
2
The history of cartels, for this is what we are here describing, records cases in
which the mere threat of establishing a new firm has enabled men of substance to
"blackmail" collusive associations into paying them large sums of money as the price
of keeping out

207

COLLUSION

sumers would get a larger quantity of the product at price OP from
xfirmsall operating at approximately their most efficient scales, and
each supplying OQ units, whereas under the collusive agreement
consumers get a smaller quantity at the higher price OP', from a
larger number of firms, each producing OQ' unit£ and operating at
high and inefficient points C" on their cost curves.
Dollars

COMPETITIVE FIRM

COLLUSIVE FIRM

Dollars
ATC

\

/

MC
/
ATC

pi _ .

Q'
Sales per time period

Sales per time period
FIG. 17-3

Collusive techniques. Economic history is replete with examples
of the many and ingenious ways in which firms have tried to escape
from what they regard as "cut throat" competition. The following
devices by no means exhaust the list. The managements of the
firms may agree (a) to a division of the market, in a geographic
sense, with each firm seeking sales only in the territory reserved to
it, or (b) to sell only through a common selling agency and on a
quota basis, or (c) to adjust their prices to those of a dominant
firm in the industry. This last is known as price leadership. Price
leadership is not, however, an infallible evidence of collusion. It
may be quite spontaneous without prior agreement and without any
enforcement machinery.
Monopoly versus collusion. If the technical conditions in an industry and the nature of the demand for the product require a
choice between collusion and monopoly through merger, the monopoly solution may be preferable from the social point of view.
The management of the monopoly would control productive capacity and see to it that this capacity was effectively utilized. The
wastes involved in indefinitely tying up excess capacity and excess
management, which is always a scarce and very valuable resource
in any society, would be avoided. To the extent that the competition of substitutes did not protect the consumer, government regu-

208

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

lation or government ownership would be necessary. Either of
these solutions would be preferable to overt government encouragement of collusion.
Collusion and factoral rewards. Monopolistic and collusive business practices tend to depress the rewards going to resource owners.
If the latter have zero reservation prices for their services, i.e., if
they will accept any reward offered, rather than allow their resources to go idle, the economy will operate at the full employment
level and the rewards going to resource owners wall be determined
by their productivity in the competitive sector of the economy.
Firms operating in the noncompetitive sector will be obliged to pay
only enough to secure from the competitive sector the resources
required for their operations, and the scale of their operations will
be determined by the considerations discussed in the preceding
section. The firms operating in the competitive sector will operate
at zero profits and the owners of the resources, including the managements, will receive in wages, interests, and rents the equivalent
of the value output from this sector of the economy. There will be
persistent profits in the noncompetitive sector, yet these profits will
not, in and of themselves, induce expansion. They will go to the
owners of the equity capital, and, if expected to persist, they will
become capitalized by the process described in Chapter 12.3 Subsequent buyers of the securities of the firms in the noncompetitive
sector will pay prices which will yield to them the same rate of
interest as investments in the competitive sector of the economy.
With the passage of time it becomes more and more difficult to correct the situation without doing an "injustice" to thousands of innocent investors.
How adversely the long-run interests of society are affected by
monopoly and by collusion will depend upon (a) the relative size
of the noncompetitive sector, (b) the spending and investing habits
of the profit makers, and (c) the capital requirements of the society.
On balance the people of the United States may actually have benefited from the monopolistic practices of the 19th century. This is
due to the fact that the noncompetitive sector was not excessively
large, that the recipients of the monopoly gains reinvested most of
their gains, and that the country, being underdeveloped and growing rapidly in population, stood in great need of a high level of savings. Thus the very deficiencies in the market mechanism, while
unfair to factor owners at every moment of time, served to squeeze
out of the economy a larger annual volume of voluntary savings
3 See pp. 147-8.

COLLUSION

209

than would otherwise have been possible. The result was that the
rate of capital formation exceeded the rate of population increase
taken as a whole. The growing army of workers was equipped with
a steadily larger and better kit of tools and was thus able to turn
out consumer goods and services in such increasing volumes that
real wages rose faster than ever before in recorded history.
Nonetheless, public opinion rightly disapproved of these monopolistic gains, but was never entirely clear as to the best method of
eliminating them. One possible method of coping with the situation
is to offset business monopoly and collusion with monopoly and
collusion on the part of resource owners. The idea is that, if the
bargaining power of resource owners can be built up, results may
be expected comparable to those which would prevail if the entire
economy operated under the conditions of pure competition.
COLLUSION AMONG OTHER RESOURCE OWNERS
In this section we discuss collective bargaining and the New Deal
Agricultural program as examples of recent developments based on
this idea of equalizing the bargaining power of workers and farmers.
Collective bargaining. From a strictly economic point of view a
trade union is a collusive organization of resource owners,4 formed
for the purpose of bringing about a level of wages and conditions
of work more favorable to the group than those determined by
market forces. This result is secured by collective as opposed to
individual bargaining. The employees of the firm form a union,
elect officers, and authorize them to bargain with management regarding wages, hours, and other conditions of employment. If the
firm can be induced to accept the arrangement and an agreement
can be reached as to rates of pay for various categories of work, the
firm must pay these rates regardless of how many or how few workers it employs. The labor supply confronting the firm is a horizontal
straight line.
In a later chapter we shall examine in some detail the effects of
collective bargaining in the United States. At this point the analysis
remains at the strictly theoretical level and is based on the assumptions of our isolated and static model as it appears after the in4
Unionism aims at more than an improvement in the wage contract. We are not
here concerned with these other activities, many of which are socially beneficial. Our
interest is exclusively with the union as a group of workers who have been accorded
the legal privilege of bringing collusive pressure on firms for the purpose of altering
the wage contract in their favor, and with the over-all effects of its action.

210

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

troduction of collusion and the departures from pure competition
described in this and the preceding chapter. In particular, we
assume (1) that some of the firms operate under conditions of pure
competition; (2) that the rest operate under one or another form
of monopolistic competition (hereafter referred to as the noncompetitive firms); (3) that there is some collusion among firms; and
(4) that all resource owners have zero price reservations. It follows from the assumption of pure competition (5) that collective
bargaining can be practiced only in the noncompetitive sector of
the economy. Finally we assume (6) that all firms in the noncompetitive sector agree to bargain collectively.
Under these conditions what effects will collective bargaining
have on employment? on wages as a whole? on wages for comparable work? on profits? Will it lessen or increase personal inequalities in the distribution of the social output? Will it bring the
economy closer to or carry it farther away from the position of
long-run equilibrium which serves as our standard or yardstick?
The employment effect. The answer to the question regarding
employment follows from our fourth assumption. The economy will
continue to operate at the full employment level. Collective bargaining reduces the amount of labor and capital employed in the
noncompetitive sector of the economy and increases the amount in
the competitive sector.
The effect on factoral rewards. The rewards going to factor owners in the competitive sector are reduced.
The effect on the real incomes of wage earners, taken as a whole,
and upon wage differentials will depend on how collective bargaining affects the volume of employment in the noncompetitive sector
of the economy. Two outcomes are possible.
1. If most of the firms in the noncompetitive sector had been
able, prior to the advent of collective bargaining, to secure from the
competitive sector all the labor they needed at rates a trifle above
those in that sector, their labor supply curves would already have
been horizontal. Collective bargaining would simply raise these
curves to higher levels. But wages represent a variable cost. Hence
the marginal costs of these firms would rise, and they would cut
production back to the scales at which marginal cost equals marginal revenue. Prices would rise and profits would decline.
The effect on prices, outputs, and profits would depend on the
elasticities of the demands for the various products involved. High
elasticities would lead to relatively large cut-backs in output, relatively small rises in prices, and considerable reductions in profits.

COLLUSION

211

Conversely, low elasticities would result in relatively small reductions in profits and production, but relatively sharp price advances.
In either event there would be a transfer of labor and capital
from the noncompetitive to the competitive sector. Wages in the
competitive sector would fall, and interest would decline in both
sectors. Wage inequalities would be increased. Given skills would
command higher wages in the noncompetitive than in the competitive sector. Whether wages as a whole would be increased or decreased would depend on whether the absolute gains of the
unionized workers exceeded the losses of the unorganized workers.
The personal distribution of the national income would be
altered. This would produce a change in the flow of consumer demand which, in turn, would require changes in the operation programs of firms. Some industries would expand, while others would
contract. The final result would not conform with our "ideal" competitive model. Furthermore, there would be a persistent and
socially disturbing inequality in the rewards going to workers of
comparable skills and merits, according as they worked for competitive or noncompetitive firms.
2. There is at least the possibility of a more favorable outcome
if monopsony and oligopsony are widespread in the labor markets
in which the firms in the noncompetitive sector of the economy hire
their workers. In that event, collective bargaining would substitute
horizontal for rising labor supply curves. And these, in turn, might
make it profitable for the firms to hire more rather than less labor.
Should that happen the transfer of resources out of the competitive
sector would produce just the opposite effects on wages, interest,
and rents from those just noted. The decline in rents and the fall in
profits, interest, and managerial earnings might result in an increase
in the proportion of the total output going to wage earners. There
would, however, still be socially disturbing and ethically unjustifiable differentials in wages going to workers of comparable skills,
depending on the sector of the economy to which they were attached.
The new equilibrium would be precarious. Workers from the
competitive sector would seek employment in the unionized industries. The unions would face the same problem that confronts business cartels. To be really effective, they would have to be able to
control entry into their organizations and to force the firms to employ only union workers.5
Labor-management collusion. The most effective method of
5

A union which is able to do this is known as a closed union.

212

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

enforcing this monopoly is through a joint agreement with the
managements of the firms with which the unions have contracts.
These firms can well afford to pay generous wages if the unions
can guarantee (a) that all the firms in the agreement will pay the
same wages and (b) that any new firms entering the field will have
to pay these rates from the start. This situation reduces the temptation managements might have to evade their commitments and
increases the difficulty of establishing new firms. In addition to the
problem of raising capital, the interlopers would now find that they
were up against the problem of getting an adequate supply of labor.
True, there is an ample supply in the competitive sector available
on favorable terms, but the representatives of the unions can make
it difficult, if not impossible, for a new firm to assemble an effective
work force. And even if the new firms succeed in assembling a
work force, they will probably have to recognize the union and pay
at least the union scale. Since a new firm is likely to lose money for
the first year or two while developing a market for its products and
breaking in its labor forces, the union can increase substantially the
risks of entry.
When labor and management cooperate with a view to forcing
completely uniform wage standards on all firms in an industry, collusion is to be inferred. Without this "collaboration," competition
may be expected to break through and return the industry to the
competitive sector of the economy. Labor-management collusion
creates a type of monopoly that is peculiarly difficult to break down.
Government-sponsored collusion in agriculture. In 1933 the Con-

gress undertook to help the farmers.6 For more than a decade, per
capita incomes in this most competitive sector of the economy had
been substantially less than that in the nonfarm sector, and several
million small farmers on marginal or submarginal lands were in
acute distress. Beginning in that year the government started on a
price support and output restriction program. The purpose was to
provide farmers with incomes equal to those prevailing in other
sectors of the economy. Conduct which had hitherto been prohibited was now authorized, and federal funds were used to induce
compliance. A highly competitive industry was converted into a
legal and quasi-compulsory cartel.
The supporting theory. The proponents of the program alleged
that, although the farmer sold in highly competitive markets, almost everything he bought was produced and sold under noncompetitive conditions. Hence the terms of the exchange were held to
6

The details of the farm aid program of the 1930s are given in Chapter 35.

COLLUSION

213

be not only unfavorable, as evidenced by the low incomes of farmers, but unfair. If effective competition could not be restored to
the markets in which he bought, then he should be granted the
power to control the supply of the things he produced. But the
hundreds of thousands of small and scattered producers of the various agricultural products which constitute American agriculture
could not possibly agree upon and enforce a reasonable restriction
program. The government would have to establish the program
and enforce it.
Compulsory restrictions, so ran the thesis, would not only be
"fair," but they would, in addition, improve the performance of the
economy as a whole. This fortunate harmony between the farmer's
interest and the national interest was said to be due to the inelasticity of demand for agricultural products. A relatively small restriction of output would lead to a relatively large rise in price.
Supplies would still be adequate, but henceforth nonfarm householders and the users of agriculture's industrial raw materials would
have to pay "fair" prices. These prices would raise the farmers' income and thus provide a better market for the firms' catering to the
needs of agriculture. The resulting expansion of demand would
help revive business and thus increase the prosperity and well being
of the nonfarm as well as the farm population. All would gain and
none would lose.
The theory appraised. Under the assumption of our present
model, this theory can be shown to be false.7 The farmer's gain in
purchasing power would be at the expense of other groups which
would now have less to spend. Nonfarm consumers as a whole
would lose. Firms catering particularly to the needs of the farm
population (the manufacturers of agricultural machinery, for example) might gain temporarily, but, in that event, the losses of
other firms would be all the greater.
A more serious objection to the program is its effects on the allocation of resources. The extremely low incomes of farmers were
due, in the last analysis, as we shall see in a later chapter, to the
fact that there were too many people trying to earn a living in
agriculture, and that the exceptionally large size of the typical farm
family resulted in such an annual increase in numbers as to keep
farm incomes below nonfarm incomes. Parity income was a correct
goal of public policy, but the method adopted was inappropriate.
It encouraged more people to remain on the land than were re7
As will be shown later, the withdrawal of these assumptions does not call for any
important modification of this conclusion.

214

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

quired to satisfy the needs of consumers. At official "parity prices"
it was profitable for farmers to produce more than consumers would
buy. As a result, the government was obliged to develop an extraordinarily costly administrative machine for policing the program
and for buying up and destroying, or selling at less than cost, or
giving away the increased output that farmers managed to get out
of their reduced acreages by improved farm practices.
The farmer's plight in 1933 required public action. We shall have
more to say later regarding the farm problem. The point to note
here is that we cannot escape from the adverse effects of monopoly
and collusion in the industrial and commercial sectors of the economy by legalizing and supporting out of the public purse monopoly
and collusive practices on the part of resource owners. A student
sometimes arrives at a correct answer to a mathematical problem
as a result of a series of compensating errors. A society cannot
count on solving its problems by compounding errors in public
policy.
Questions:
1. Define collusion; describe the conditions on the side of supply and
of demand that favor collusive practices; identify practices which the
American courts have held to be collusive; show why collusion tends
to break down unless it is legalized and enforced by government.
2. "From the point of view of the general interest, regulated monopoly is
preferable to legalized collusion." Indicate with supporting reasons
your agreement or disagreement with this statement.
3. "Collusion and monopoly, if long tolerated, cannot be eliminated by
government without hurting many innocent people." Explain the
basis for this statement.
4. "On balance the collusion and monopoly prevalent in the United
States during the second half of the 19th century may actually have
benefited the vast majority of the American people."
(a) Explain the reasoning needed to support this statement.
(b) Does this reasoning justify toleration of collusion and monopolistic practices in the United States at the present time?
5. Discuss the employment, wage and distributional effect of collective
bargaining on the following assumptions:
(a) that all firms operate under conditions of pure competition both
in their product markets and their resource markets;
(b) that all firms operate under conditions of pure competition in
their labor markets but that some operate under one or another form

COLLUSION

215

of monopolistic competition (or collusion) in their product markets;
(c) that all firms operate under conditions of pure competition in
their product markets but that some are monopsonistic or oligopsonistic with respect to their labor markets.
6. Can any of the conclusions you reached in answering question 5 be
used to support the following proposition: "On balance the development of strong trade unions during the second half of the 19th century
would have benefited the vast majority of the American people."
7. "American farm policy from 1933 on provides an example of the economics of collusion." Do you agree or disagree? Justify your answer.

18
Effective Competition

R account, up to this point,
of the way in which an enterprise system is supposed to work presupposes the existence of competition. But is the American economy competitive? If not, can it be made competitive? If it cannot
be made competitive, what alternative forms of economic organization are there from which to choose? Our answer to the last
question is reserved to chapters 43, 44, and 45, where we examine
three alternatives to competitive capitalism. In this chapter we
seek answers to the first two questions.
Review of the ground covered. In Chapter 6 we identified various concepts of competition. Our first and very rough definition
was formulated in terms of results. Competition was said to exist
in a given market whenever each seller in that market could improve his own economic position only by offering more for less.
Recognizing the difficulty of applying this test for the purpose of
analyzing the behavior of the individual firm, we pointed out that
economists have increasingly turned to the study of market organization or market structure for guidance in predicting how firms will
behave in given situations. To this end, they have developed the
concepts of "ideal" and "pure" competition, and deviations from
pure competition. All of these definitions are conceived in terms
of market organization. Finally, it will be recalled that we defined
"market" as a process of exchange involving goods and services,
buyers and sellers, area or place where the process occurs, and time.
In Chapters 7 through 15 we studied how the forces of supply
and demand, operating in commodity and resource markets, will,
if pure competition prevails, (a) allocate resources, (b) determine
the totality of the things produced (output), and (c) distribute
this output among resource owners. This analysis provided us with
216

EFFECTIVE COMPETITION

217

the concept of general equilibrium. In an economy in general longrun equilibrium, output would be at a maximum, input in terms of
real sacrifices or costs would be at a minimum, and the claims on
the output would be divided among resource owners in such a
fashion that no resource owner could improve his position by shifting his resources to an alternative use.
In Chapters 15 and 16 we compared these results with those to
be expected in the event of departures from pure competition.
These departures we identified by the rather sinister-sounding
words monopoly, oligopoly, monopolistic competition; their counterparts, monopsony, oligopsony, and monopsonistic competition; and
finally collusion.
The policy implications of this analysis are clear. Given the assumptions of a closed and stationary community in which there is
no population growth and no change in the arts (technological
progress), the interests of all the people, and hence of the community itself, will be best served if pure competition prevails.
Hence the primary economic function of government should be to
promote pure competition.
This analysis recognizes that the functionally correct distribution
of rewards may result in such large personal inequalities in incomes
(because of the very unequal endowments of individuals and the
existence of the right of bequest or inheritance) that the people as
a whole might be happier if some way could be found of inducing
those favored by nature or nurture to help those who, for one reason or another, can bring resources of little economic significance
to the market. This possibility suggests that, if the majority of the
people in the community hold this view, the best procedure would
be to allow incomes to be distributed first by pure competition, and
then redistributed by government through its power to tax and to
spend. Thus the inevitability of considerable income inequality in
an enterprise society does not call for any modification of the conclusion that the primary economic function of government is to
enforce pure competition.
The purpose of this chapter. We now withdraw the limiting assumptions of a stationary population and a given and unchanging
body of technological knowledge and ask whether this policy conclusion needs to be modified.
We know that nothing approximating pure competition has ever
prevailed in the American economy, or in that of any other national
economy, past or present. The fact that pure competition has never

218

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

prevailed has produced three different reactions among economists
and the public generally.
One group, enamored of the picture of an economy dominated by
pure competition, argues that the State can and should create
markets in which economic behavior will be forced to conform as
closely as possible with that which would prevail under pure competition. They are against bigness in all its forms—big business, big
labor, and big government. Our appraisal of this position will
emerge in connection with our discussion of the views of the third
group.
A second group, likewise wedded to the concept of pure competition, holds that market imperfections are so widespread and so
deeply rooted in the institutions of private property and private
enterprise that the only proper procedure is to scrap private capitalism entirely. They would replace it by a type of socialism in
which the State, through its ownership and control of private property, will be able to bring about the same results that would prevail under purely competitive capitalism if the "bourgeois" or
capitalistic State were prepared to redistribute functionally determined incomes with greater reference to individual needs. We shall
examine this possibility in Chapter 44.
The third group holds that in a growing and dynamic economy
the concept of pure competition is useful as long as it is recognized
for what it is: a means of indicating the position toward which the
economy should be moving. It becomes dangerous if it is used to
suggest public controls designed to make markets conform with the
ideal markets of pure competition. The proper tests for control
should be based on performance. This group would therefore substitute a somewhat nebulous concept of "effective" or "workable"
competition as the goal toward which public policy should be
directed.
The purpose of this chapter is, first, to explain why an economy
which is to remain dynamic and progressive, capable of providing
more things for more people at lower real costs, must necessarily
deviate from the pure competition model; and second, to appraise
the charge that the American economy is becoming progressively
less competitive.
The impossibility of pure competition. There are many reasons
why a progressive and productive economy can never conform to
the specifications of pure competition. Consumers are never completely indifferent to anything but price. The personalities of a
storekeeper and his clerks are important. Courtesy does and should

EFFECTIVE COMPETITION

219

pay dividends. Employees are interested in more than wages and
various external conditions of employment like sanitation and safety
devices. Businessmen differ in their ability to enlist loyalties, and
again it is desirable that firms under good leadership should grow
at the expense of those under less capable leadership. Nor do consumers really want their range of choice narrowed by the product
standardization that is one of the assumptions of pure competition.
Product differentiation encourages consumption and, over a period
of time, improves the quality of consumption, which, after all, is
one of the main purposes of production. Furthermore, it enormously fosters the technological progress that must go forward if
the level of living is to rise in a country with a growing population.
It is unrealistic to expect in the real world that the number of
suppliers in every market shall be so numerous that the action of
no one of them can affect market price. In many lines of production the number of suppliers must be so small, if the economies of
size are to be realized, that each supplier knows and must take account of the fact that any substantial modification of his output
will affect market price and lead to adjustments by the others.
The management of a firm must always weigh the immediate advantages or disadvantages of its decisions against longer-run consequences. Charging all that the traffic will bear at every instant of
time, shifting orders from one supplier to another on the basis
of insignificant differences in quotations, would destroy the element
of good will which every successful firm strives to build up.
Much of the sunk capital of a firm is durable, specialized, immovable, and indivisible. Changes are necessarily infrequent and,
when made, have to be made on a considerable scale. This means
that in a world of change most plant is either too small or too large,
and much of it is not located at its optimum geographical position.
Only at the moment of decision has a firm a reasonably wide range
of sites from which to choose. The choice itself may be influenced
by noneconomic considerations—the residential preferences of key
personnel, for example—or by a faulty analysis of the locational
forces to be taken into account. And even when the original choice
was correct, dynamic forces may soon change the situation. It must
compete as best it can against newcomers who can choose a better
site and take advantage of recent development affecting equipment
and plant layout. Situations of this sort create a continuous threat
to existing firms in the form of potential competition. A formal description of the structure of a market, in terms of the number of

220

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

existing suppliers and the proportion of the total output provided
by each, can never capture the reality of potential competition.
Furthermore rapid technological progress brings with it a type
of competition which was perforce ignored in our study of pure
competition in a stationary economy. We refer here to the competition of substitutes. Here is a pervasive force constantly undermining even the most entrenched monopoly positions.
A description of market structure, as it exists at a given time,
cannot possibly capture the impact of these two dynamic forcespotential competition and the competition of substitutes—upon
managerial decisions.
In view of all these circumstances the behavior of firms and of
consumers cannot possibly conform precisely with the postulates
of pure competition. All that this concept can do (and this justifies its use) is to identify the nature of the pressures at work and
the direction of the adjustments which human beings in their roles
as consumers and resource owners will find it advantageous to
make, if artificial deterrents to action are not protected by law.
The maneuvering, the attempts to differentiate their products by
advertising and by special servicing, the researching for new and
better methods of producing and marketing goods and services, all
are responses to these constant pressures.
How competitive is the American market? The answer to this
question depends to a considerable extent on the meaning we attach to the word "competition." If we insist that any departure
from pure competition represents monopoly, we shall have to admit
that the American economy is not now and never has been competitive. There is increasing recognition, however, that competition
does not have to be pure in order to be effective. Professor J. M.
Clark of Columbia University 1 suggests that public opinion should
be more concerned with maintaining what he calls "workable competition" and less with condemning every departure from pure competition as evidence that private capitalism is a failure. Professor
Slichter of Harvard asserts flatly the superiority of monopolistic
competition "because it is broader and stimulates improvements in
products as well as improvements in processes." 2 Professor George
Stigler's investigations of the monopoly-competition problem in the
United States has led him to the conclusion that "competition de1
J. M. Clark, "Toward a Concept of Workable Competition," American Economic
Review, Vol. XXX, No. 2, June, 1940, pp. 241-56.
2
Professor Slichter, The American Economy: Its Problems and Prospects, Knopf,
New York: 1948, p. 15.

EFFECTIVE COMPETITION

221

clined moderately from the Civil War to the end of the nineteenth
century, and thereafter increased moderately/' He finds no convincing evidence in support of the popular thesis that "competition
has been declining steadily (and in many versions, drastically) for a
half century or more." 3
The Brookings Institution has recently completed an intensive
factual study of the performance of the American economy and
has come to the conclusion that it is highly competitive.4 In Big
Business5 David Lilienthal, for 13 years head of the federal government's giant TVA operations, and later Chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission of the United States, the largest industrial
monopoly of history, has admitted that his early conceptions regarding the behavior of our giant corporations do not fit the facts
of today. He flatly declares that Big Business has introduced a new,
vitalizing, and socially beneficial type of competition that is superior in every way to the type of competition suggested by the
analytical concepts of competition found in most American textbooks on economics. He claims that, perhaps unwittingly, the economists' terminology has done much to discredit modern business
in the public mind. Thus, he writes:
One reason the very existence of Bigness is so often assumed to be
monopolistic is the use the scholarly economist makes of the term
"competition"—to express an abstract concept of competition of many
small units. This conceptual use of the term, and the invention by economists of other and distinguishing terms such as oligopoly, duopoly, imperfect competition, . . . etc., has tended to obscure the fact that rivalry
between a few big units is definitely competition. Thus a popular misuse
of a theoretician's term has led to unsound public policy and confused
thinking by laymen—in short, has been injurious to the public interest.6
The late Professor Schumpeter, one-time Finance Minister of the
Austrian Republic and later the successor to Professor Taussig at
Harvard University, was particularly emphatic regarding the reality
of competition in the United States. In Capitalism, Socialism, and
3
George J. Stigler, as reprinted in A. G. Gayer, C. Lowell Harris and Milton H.
Spencer, Basic Economics: A Book of Readings, Prentice-Hall, New York: 1951, p.
211.
4
Big Business in the Competitive System, The Brookings Institution, Washington:
1953.
•"' David E. Lilienthal, Big Business: A New Era, Harper & Bros., New York:
1952-3.
6 Ibid., p. 55.

222

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS
1

Democracy, perhaps the most significant study of comparative
economic systems which has appeared in this generation, Schumpeter examined the pessimistic implications of the theories of "imperfect" competition. His conclusion was that, although they were
quite accurate as a picture of the performance of the American
economy at any moment of time, they were extremely misleading
as a picture of that same economy in motion. When the economy
is studied as a moving picture, the record reveals the persistent
presence of monopoly profits of one sort or another, but the significant fact is that the sources from which these profits rise are
continuously changing. The dynamic forces in the economy are
constantly destroying old monopolies and, as constantly, are creating new ones.
Schumpeter's thesis is that, when capitalism is studied as an
economy in motion, it becomes clear that its very imperfections
are what keep it dynamic and progressive. The successful businessman is, par excellence, the agent of progress. He is an innovator.
He has that rare combination of courage, self-confidence, and imagination which leads him to bring together the factors of production in new and more fruitful ways. Many of these new ways
require large fixed investments, huge gambles on consumer reactions, and hence enormous risks. Once liquid savings are frozen
into specialized plant and equipment, it takes years to get them
out through the slow processes of amortization. On the other hand,
obsolescence starts in immediately. There are bound to be "bugs"
in new machines which only come to light when the machines are
put into actual use. An improved plant layout does not long represent the last word; actual operating experience soon suggests
improvements. Most plant is not located in the precise place where
management would locate it if the decision could be made anew.
What is is always inferior to what might be. The risks of innovation would be prohibitive if potential competitors could always
wait for the innovators to try out the new and then avoid their
inevitable errors and take advantage of the equally inevitable shortcomings in the translation of plans into plants. It is the very fact
of short-run profits and, still more, the largely illusory hope of making monopoly profits extending over long periods of time that are
needed to keep alive the spirit of enterprise.
As long as the environment is kept favorable to risk-taking, the
accelerating progress in the pure and applied sciences continuously
7 J. A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, Harper & Bros., New
York: 1942.

EFFECTIVE COMPETITION

223

opens up new and more effective ways of satisfying old and familiar
wants and, what is far more important, of creating and satisfying
wants that had hitherto been outside the realm of practical possibilities. This dynamism constantly destroys old monopolies and as
constantly creates new ones. Meantime it increases enormously the
range of consumer choice. It provides spice and variety to life.
Profits, according to Schumpeter, are the rewards going to those
who promote change. Thus the functions of profits are, on the one
hand, to destroy profits in areas where change and growth are temporarily absent and, on the other, to direct capital and innovating
talents into those areas where the situation is ripe for change.
Moreover, profits provide an important part of the funds needed
to finance new developments. It is precisely the imperfections of
competition in the short-run that keep the economy dynamic, growing, and competitive in the long-run. Patents, secret processes,
brand names, lavish advertising, and the collusive understandings
between firms (which tend to be more honored in the breach than
the observance), all these, says Schumpeter, are maneuvers to protect heavy investments from "the perennial gale of competition."
Their justification is that they sometimes divert the strong winds
of competition long enough for the suppliers of risk-capital to recover a reasonable part of their investments before new techniques
and new products blow down the fragile barriers. Remove the expectation of monopoly profits, and capitalism collapses. This, in
brief, is Schumpeter's thesis.
General conclusion. If this thesis is correct, departures from
pure competition are not to be regarded as evidences of the decay
of competitive capitalism. But why then did we study production
and pricing under the unrealistic and unrealizable conditions of
pure competition? The answer, to repeat, is that the concept is
useful for analyzing the behavior of the firm and the trade union,
which is, from a strictly economic point of view, an agency for
marketing the services of labor. The theory permits us to predict
the direction of changes that tend to occur as dynamic forces drive
an economy away from its general equilibrium position, and to
suggest public interventions which will help restore equilibrium
without unduly weakening the dynamic forces that are always present in a free society. But the controls should be geared to the end
sought and not to the creation of the types of imaginary markets
used in explaining the formation of prices under conditions of pure
competition. The Schumpeter thesis suggests that we should not
become unduly alarmed by monopolistic maneuvers, provided they

224

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

do no more than slow down the powerful motor of the capitalistic
engine. A high-powered automobile needs brakes, as well as an
engine. And, as we shall see when we examine the problem of
social security, its performance will be all the better if it is equipped
with good springs to carry the passengers in reasonable comfort
over the rough patches in the road the car must travel.
We now proceed to an examination of capitalism in action. This
requires that we remove, one by one, the remaining assumptions
which have governed the analysis up to this point. We start by
withdrawing the assumption of isolation.
Questions:
1. "Given the assumptions of an isolated and stationary economy in
which all economic activities conform with the requirements of pure
competition, the primary and virtually the sole economic function
of the State is to enforce competition."
Explain the supporting reasoning.
2.

"The concept of pure competition has contributed materially to the
break-down of popular confidence in the workability of the private
enterprise system. Economists should abandon it even as a teaching
device."
(a) What is the basis for the charge made in the above statement?
(b) Explain why economists who admit that there is an element of
truth in the charge nonetheless regard the concept of pure competition as useful both for teaching and for policy making purposes.

3.

"It is precisely the imperfections of competition in the short-run that
keeps an economic system dynamic, progressive, and competitive in
the long run."
(a) Identify some of the imperfections implied in the statement
above and argue for or against its validity;
(b) Argue for or against the proposition that the argument encompasses strong collective bargaining as one of the imperfections which
improves the long-run performance of a competitive enterprise system.

19
General Equilibrium:
Regional ana International

R interest in this chapter is in
determining whether the price mechanism that we have been studying works toward the establishment of a general equilibrium in a
world divided into a large number of independent states. No one
of these states possesses the diversity of resources which will permit its people to enjoy all the advantages of specialization if their
right to trade with people in other states is restricted. We know
that national levels of well being differ enormously at the present
time, and that the gap between the richest and the poorest countries is wider now than it was 200 years ago. Is this gap due to the
private enterprise system or to interferences of national governments
with the international functioning of the price mechanism? The final
answer must wait until we examine in a later chapter problems in
the field of international economic policy. Here we confine ourself to noting how greatly national levels of well being differ from
country to country, identifying some of the principal economic
forces responsible for these differences, and showing why the private enterprise system has not been able to close the widening gap.
We continue to disregard governments despite the fact that governmental interferences may be partly responsible for the present
situation. What we want to show is that the task of equalizing factoral rewards throughout the world would be long and arduous
even though the world were a political unit within which labor,
capital, and entrepreneurship could move as freely as they are able
to move within the confines of the United States.
225

226

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

REGIONAL INEQUALITIES: SOME FACTS
Differences in per capita money incomes provide a rough indication of regional differences in levels of living.1 The indication is
necessarily very rough because it makes no allowance for differences
in the personal distribution of incomes within countries and because
the measurement of a nation's total income involves considerable
guessing. If two countries have equal per capita real incomes, the
general level of living will be higher in the one with the more equal
distribution of wealth. Whether it will remain higher is another
matter. That will depend, to a considerable extent, upon the rate
of capital formation. If, as is likely, the more unequal personal
distribution leads to higher rate of capital formation, the mass of
the population in the country with the more equal distribution will
fall behind. The other shortcoming of national income figures is
their inaccuracies. These inaccuracies increase as we pass from the
wealthier to the poorer and less developed countries. There are
several reasons for this, (a) In the first place, an unusually large
proportion of what families in poor countries consume is produced
within the household. Since these goods and services do not appear
on the market, they do not get registered and counted. Their production and consumption lie outside the capitalistic system. The
margin of error in estimating this aspect of consumption is particularly large in predominantly agrarian countries, and, as we shall
see later, countries with very low levels of living are predominantly
agrarian, (b) In the second place the collection of income data
is primarily the by-product of administering the regulatory and
fiscal functions of the State. Income tax laws yield a rich harvest
of data essential to estimating the national income. Primitive countries either have no income taxes or administer them with notorious
inefficiency, (c) In addition, the technical competence of the statistical staffs of poor countries tend to be lower than that of
wealthy countries. For all these reasons monetary data on levels of
living in different countries are likely to exaggerate differences in
levels of living, (d) Finally the data do not and cannot measure
differences in the satisfactions or the psychic incomes of peoples.
The following table gives the estimates of one of the most competent specialists in the field of national income estimates.
Discount the figures as we may, the fact remains that life is a
great deal more comfortable in some parts of the world than in
others.
i See Chapter 15 for the definition of this term.

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

227
TABLE 19-1

AVERAGE REAL INCOME PER EMPLOYED PERSON

IN INTERNATIONAL UNITS, 1925-1934 2

United States
Canada
New Zealand
Great Britain
Argentina
Netherlands
Sweden
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

Japan

Yugoslavia
U.S.S.R.
Roumania
British India
China

1,381
1,337
1,202
1,069
1,000
855
653

455
359
353
330
320
243
200
110

NATIONAL INEQUALITIES: THE CAUSES
The causes of differences in levels of living among nations of the
world are many and complex. The main obstacles to equalization
are social, cultural, and political, rather than economic. Nonetheless the following economic causes are important and need to be
considered by those formulating plans for improving conditions in
the poorer parts of the world: (a) inequalities in the geographical
distribution of natural resources; (b) differences in the ratios of
population to natural resources; (c) differences in the ratios of
populations to artificial capital; (d) differences in rates of population growth; (e) differences in rates of capital formation; (f) differences in rates of technological progress; and finally (g) the
sluggishness of international and interregional capital and population movements.
(a) The geographical distribution of natural resources. Natural

resources (land in the broadest sense) are immobile, and they are
distributed very unevenly over the globe. Some are inexhaustible
under wise management; others are not. In any event, labor and
capital must be applied to them where they are.
2 Quoted by Emil Rieve, International Labor Standards, A Key to World Security,
published by Textile Workers Union of America, CIO, New York n.d. from Colin
Clark, Conditions of Economic Progress, Macmillan, New York: 1940, pp. 41-42.

228

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

Mineral resources are exhaustible. Some, however, are so abundant and so widely distributed as to raise no special problems. Others are relatively abundant but so concentrated as to give the
people in the areas involved a marked advantage over their neighbors.
The combination of coal, iron, and limestone in the Ruhr and Lorraine basins makes that region the industrial heartland of the western half of continental Europe. England has been called a lump of
coal floating off the west coast of Europe. The industrial pre-eminence of 19th century Britain was founded on coal. So accessible
was it, and so cheaply could the complementary raw materials be
brought to England, processed, and distributed to the four quarters
of the earth by water, the most economical of all forms of transportation, that this asset alone offset Britain's lack of other raw materials. The Pittsburgh area of the United States is similarly founded
on coal. On the whole, gold and silver, and other precious metals,
are found in areas so unfavorable otherwise as to prevent excessive
population growth. The vast quantities of oil that lie below the
exhausted and arid soils of the Near East have as yet contributed
little to the well being of the peoples of that region.
Several points about the world's mineral resources are to be
noted. One is that they are not assets until their presence is known
and techniques have been discovered and capital and management
found for converting them to human use on profitable terms. At
the present time only a portion of the world's natural resources are
so located as to warrant economic exploitation. The rest are submarginal. People occupying an area with an abundance of usable
natural resources have a better chance in life than people in less
favored areas. Whether, in fact, they enjoy a higher level of living
will depend on the values that dominate the society and on the
closely related factors of population pressure (which we shall consider presently) and technology.
The abundant bauxite deposits of Arkansas were long used as road
fill. Recent technical developments have made them a valuable raw material for an expanding aluminum industry. The interior of Africa is said
to be rich in minerals. Given the climate and the primitive technologies
of the natives, they contribute little at present to human welfare there or
anywhere else.
A second point to note is that minerals are exhaustible. This is
of little consequence until the date of exhaustion draws close.
Then an area heavily dependent on a single exhaustible resource
faces an extremely difficult problem of adaptation.

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

229

England's future is somber in part because of the fact that her most
accessible deposits of coal have been worked out. Her people must now
compete with peoples where coal and power generally are obtainable on
more favorable terms. The richest and most accessible of the fabulous
iron ore deposits of the Lake Superior region are said to be approaching
exhaustion. If so, part of the population of the area will have to migrate,
or accept lower levels of living, unless, as now appears likely, new and
low cost techniques can be developed for extracting ore from deposits
heretofore regarded as submarginal, or unless people in more favored
parts of the country are willing to support them through grants-in-aid.
Water belongs in the broad category called land. Its importance
in agriculture is discussed later. Here it suffices to point out that
rivers, gulfs, bays, and the oceans are important as sources of food
and power, as well as avenues of transportation. People favorably
located with respect to water will have an economic advantage,
other things being equal, over those who lack this versatile resource.
Soils may be destructible or indestructible, depending on how
men use them. Archaeological expeditions have revealed the existence of elaborate civilizations in what are now waste lands. For
some reason or another, the soils were not maintained. Many a
vanished civilization appears to have been the victim of soil erosion,
and the process is still going on. Human habitations, for example,
have largely disappeared from the county in Mississippi which
led the world in production of cotton per acre in the 1850s.
The spatial distribution of good soils is very uneven. In general,
according to soil experts, only a small fraction of the earth's surface
constitutes really good agricultural land in the sense that climate,
rainfall, slope, mineral content, and organic composition of the
top soil combine to assure good crops year in and year out under
intelligent management.
The soils of Prussia are thin and sandy by comparison with those of
France. Within the United States only some five percent of the land area
was rated as Grade 1 for agricultural purposes in a survey made in the
early 1930s.3 Eleven, 18 and 16 percent were classed as Grades 2, 3, and
4 respectively; almost one-half fell in the fifth and lowest grade of submarginal land. Furthermore the various grades are present in very different proportions in the various parts of the United States. The single
state of Iowa, according to this survey, had more Grade 1 land than was
to be found in the 11 states of the Southeast.
(b) Population-natural resource ratios. There is no necessary rea-

son why national differences in the quantity and quality of natural
3 National Resources Board Report of December 1, 1934, (Government Printing
Office), Washington, Pt. II, p. 127.

230

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

resources should result in differences in national levels of living.
The latter depend upon the marginal productivity of the labor and
capital applied to these resources. If the population in a poor land
area is scarce, but has at its disposal ample and appropriate artificial capital, the marginal productivity of labor will be high, and
the general level of living will also be high. The existence of fertile
lands, on the other hand, provides no guarantee that the people will
be well off. Numbers and the lack of capital can spell poverty for
most of the residents of such an area.
(c) Population-capital ratios. A country with an unfavorable
population-land ratio can have a high per capita output and a high
level of living if the working population is backed with adequate
tools and business leadership. But these things are not easy to obtain. Business leadership depends on a high level of education for
workers and for the leaders. Such an educational system is expensive. The tools can be created by saving and investing local
surpluses, or by borrowing from wealthier countries, or by political
aid from people in more fortunate areas. Foreign know-how can
also be hired, but the work force must be found locally and must
be induced sufficiently to want the things which modern tools can
provide and to abandon old work habits. This means that the foreign aid must somehow succeed in raising standards of living faster
than levels of living; it must, in other words, create enough discontent with things as they are to bring about changes in social and
economic institutions favorable to increased production, and yet
not so great as to provoke disorders in which part of the existing
wealth is destroyed by mass violence. The task of improving conditions in the so-called underdeveloped countries of the world is
challenging but extraordinarily delicate. Foreign political "handouts" can help if they do not arouse excessive expectations and if
the beneficiaries realize that they cannot count on their continuing
long enough to have much of an effect on existing national disparities. The main job has to be done by the people themselves.
Saving, investing, and borrowing from abroad on commercial principles are less pleasant but much more reliable methods of raising
a nation's level of living. Saving is hard at the start since there is
little surplus available. Borrowing abroad is a quicker and an easier
way. The success of the borrowing method depends upon the willingness of the borrowers to use part of the outside capital to establish enterprises producing for export markets, and upon the willingness of the people in the lending countries to buy more from abroad
than they sell when the interest payments on old loans exceeds the

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

231

new investments they are prepared to make. Otherwise, foreign
borrowing ends in defaults.
The vast majority of people are living today in areas in which
both the population-land ratio and the population-capital ratio are
unfavorable. Consequently, the productivity of labor is very low,
and any early and marked improvement in the general level of
living is unlikely.
(d) Differences in rates of population growth. The high birth
rates usually found in these underdeveloped areas constitute an additional handicap. As a general rule, natural rates of population
growth vary inversely with levels of living. The lower the marginal
productivity of man as a worker, the higher appears to be his biological productivity. The more poverty-stricken an area, the higher
in general is the birth rate. If the populations in such areas do not
increase very rapidly, it is due to the fact that the death rate is also
very high. As long as the birth rate remains high, capital accumulation and investment can do little more than prevent the level of
living from falling.
Table 19-2 shows the perverse relationship between poverty and
human fertility in two parts of Europe and suggests the relationship between industrialization and economic well being. The first six countries,
all predominantly agricultural, are located in Eastern and Southeastern
Europe. The second group of six countries are located in Western and
Northern Europe. The countries in this group had mixed economies with
a good balance, except for the United Kingdom, between agriculture,
manufacturing, and the service trades, and a substantial amount of artificial capital to back up their workers in all three branches of economic
life. Per capita real incomes are not shown, but it is well known that the
levels of living in the industrial countries were much higher than those
in the agrarian countries.
Particularly significant are the differences in the net reproduction rates
in column 3. They show that the populations of the agrarian countries
would increase by about 20 percent per generation in the absence of migration, after their age distributions have become normal. Since France
has long had a stationary population its age distribution may be regarded
as normal; 25 percent of its population is under 14 years of age, and this
is typical for the other countries in this group. For the agrarian countries
the percentage of the population under 14 ranged from 32 percent in
Greece to 41 percent in Turkey. Thus their populations would continue
to increase for some time after their fertility rates had fallen to unity.
During the 1930s population was increasing three times as fast in Eastern
and Southeastern Europe as in Western and Northern Europe.
It is worth noting that there are comparable differences in rates of

232

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

population growth within the United States. The net reproduction rate in
the South exceeded that in the Northeast by 50 percent in the period
1930-34, and by approximately 30 percent in the period 1942-47. (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1948, p. 55.) In 1947 the per capita
TABLE 19-2
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES: POPULATION GROWTH AND
THE IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURE *

Country
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Roumania
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Sweden
United Kingdom

Age DistriPercent OcPercent bution: Percupied PopIncrease in cent Total Net Reproulation
Population Population
duction Engaged in
(1932-37)
(0-14)
Ratef
Agriculture
(1)
6.2
7.0
5.8
6.0

12.6
7.7
1.8
4.2
0.2
3.2
1.6
2.0

(2)
35
32
33
36
41
35
22
25
25
24
22
22

(3)
1.2
1.2

1-1.2
1.2
—
—
0.8

0.8-1
0.8-1
0.8-1
0.8
0.8

(4)
81
54
76
78
—
79
17
35
36
29
36
6

* The figures in this table are derived from the statistical Yearbook of the League of
Nations, the International Year-Book of Agricultural Statistics (International Institute
of Agriculture) and Population and Agriculture with Special Reference to Agricultural
Overpopulation (Ser, L.O.N.P., European Conference on Rural Life, No. 3). The figures
in col. 2 refer to different years (in most cases in the 'thirties) and are thus not strictly
comparable. Those in col. 3 are quoted in Population and Agriculture, etc., from works
by R. R. Kuczynski, D. V. Glass, and C. P. Blacker.
f The United States Bureau of the Census uses the ratio of children under 5 per 1,000
women of child-bearing age for determining the net reproduction rate. This rate indicates with considerable accuracy how many daughters will be born "to the survivors
of a group of 100 female infants during the course of their lifetimes if present age specific
birth and death rates should continue unchanged. A rate of 100 would indicate that, on
the average, the survivors of such a group of 100 would give birth to 100 daughters.
Since these daughters would be just enough to replace the original cohort of mothers,
the population would remain stationary—in the next generation. If the rate were higher
than 100, however, it would indicate that the population would increase from one generation to another, and if it were lower than 100 it would indicate that the population
would decline. All these assumptions are contingent upon the continuance of the same
birth and death rates as those observed when the computation was made." (Release of
February 21,1941. Series P-5, No. 4.)

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

233

income in the Southeast was $883 as compared with $1,444 in New England and $1,559 in the Middle East. (Survey of Current Business, U. S.
Dept. of Commerce, Sept. 1948, p. 17.)
(e) Capital growth differentials. Another difficulty which the price
mechanism must overcome if it is to equalize factoral incomes
throughout the world is the differences in national rates of local
capital formation. It is very much easier for people in wealthy countries, with their relatively low reproduction rates, to increase the
quantity and improve the quality of their capital equipment than
it is for the people in poor countries with their very much higher
rates of population growth. Hence it is safe to say that capital
growth, in so far as it depends on local and voluntary saving and
investing, tends to widen national level-of-living differentials. Only
under a brutal and authoritarian regime is it possible for a poor
country to match the rate of voluntary saving that prevails in a
wealthy country. This fact makes it reasonably certain that the
large income differentials that now prevail in the free world outside
the orbit of Russian influence will increase rather than decrease,
in so far as this particular factor is at work.
(f) Differences in rates of technological progress. No less important than the factors so far considered are national differences
in public attitudes toward technological change. In some countries
rigid and unyielding folkways render it unprofitable for producers
to introduce new products or new ways of making old products.
Innovation is stifled. In others, and perhaps more so in the United
States than in any other country, consumption habits and production practices are reasonably flexible. This flexibility reduces the
resistance to change and creates an environment favorable to technological progress. As a consequence, the productivity and hence
the levels of living in countries with favorable environments tend
to draw farther and farther ahead of the levels in more conservative
countries.
(g) Immobility of the factors of production. Gross national inequalities could not persist if labor and capital were completely
mobile. In that event, savings, regardless of their points of origin,
would be invested where their marginal productivity was highest,
and workers would move from areas where their marginal productivity was low to areas where it was high. Something like this
actually happened during the 19th and the first decade of the 20th
century. Men could and did move in large numbers from one part
of the world to another. After World War I, however, movements

234

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

of population between countries were sharply restricted for a variety of reasons, partly social and partly economic. Henceforth, the
price mechanism had to accomplish its equalizing function without
one of its most important gears. It was doubly important, therefore,
that the decreased mobility of labor should be offset by increased
mobility of capital, if the equalization process were to continue.
Unfortunately this did not happen. The wealthy countries reduced
the borrowing capacity of the poor countries by their restrictions
on imports, while the growing spirit of nationalism in the poor
countries led to the imposition of discriminatory taxes and vexatious controls which further discouraged international capital movements. By the outbreak of World War II the international mobility
of labor, capital, and know-how had largely disappeared.
CAPITALISM AND THE WIDENING INTERNATIONAL GAP

The forces making for geographical inequalities are so powerful
that the gap between the wealthy and the poor countries may well
be wider fifty years hence than it is today. This is not the fault of
private capitalism as such, but rather of its unequal rate of diffusion
from its point of origin in Western Europe. It requires a peculiar
type of environment because of its very nature. It is dynamic; it is
a destroyer of ancient customs; it is continually creating new wants
and devising new and better ways of satisfying new and old wants
alike. It emphasizes and depends on the spirit of individualism; it
appeals to man's ingenuity; it rewards the innovator; it eliminates
the incompetent; it places resources in the hands of the able and
ambitious; it whips up our appetites and forces us, by extravagant
bribes and penalties, to subordinate our preferences as workers to
our preferences as consumers. In brief, it can operate effectively
only in a society which is reasonably hospitable to change and risktaking.
In most of the heavily populated countries of the world the penetration of private capitalism was very slow because it was unable to
break through the traditional ways of doing things. The peoples or
their rulers simply did not want the products of the capitalistic
machine earnestly enough to submit to its disciplines. Ancient folkways persisted. The clan, the tribe, the social group were the important entities. Individualism was decried. The social ambitions
that led people in the West to restrict the sizes of their families
were largely absent. In such environments birth rates remained
high. As a consequence the impact of modern capitalism exhausted
itself in a decrease in the death rate. The capitalistic engine, in so

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

235

far as it was operative, simply made it possible for larger numbers
to survive at approximately the same levels of living as before.
Malthusianism. What has been happening in most parts of the
world confirms a prediction made more than 150 years ago by
Thomas Malthus, a British clergyman and a close student of the
population problem. He contrasted the very slow growth of the
population of Western Europe with the extraordinarily rapid
growth of population in the American colonies, as recorded in the
annual reports of the Governors, running back over several generations. These records convinced him that the population of a fertile
but unsettled area not only could but would double every generation as a result of an excess of births over deaths until such time as
pressure of numbers led to a decline in the rate of increase in the
food supply. When this point was reached (we should now call it
the point of diminishing returns) the "niggardliness of nature"
would force the rate of population increase down to the much
slower rate of increase in the food supply. The decline would not
be the result of a fall in the birth rate but of a rise in the death rate
as the amount of food per person declined. In the course of time,
men everywhere, he predicted, were condemned by their inability
to exercise sexual restraint to live in the same abject poverty that
had been man's lot from time immemorial. Only an elite, he
thought, could escape from this impasse as a result of their willingness to limit the size of their families. And they could not escape, he argued, if the majority took away from them the surpluses
which were due to their self-restraint.
Only in the countries that accepted the culture of the West, including private capitalism, did Malthus' somber forecast prove false.
How did the West escape? The escape appears to have been due
in part to the enormous increase in per capita output made possible
by modern capitalism. "Levels of living" were lifted and held up
in the face of growing numbers long enough to get translated into
higher "standards of living," which increasing numbers were willing
to defend by voluntary limitations on the sizes of their families.
Malthus failed to realize that the sexual restraint that only his elite
were expected to practice would spread rapily to wider and wider
groups as the discovery of cheap and relatively effective contraceptives reduced the need for the difficult types of self-restraint
which he had in mind.
Political leaders in many of the poor countries see in rapid industrialization the key to the problem of poverty. They are unaware that industrialization means more than machines. It requires

236

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

a particular kind of culture and, above all, if it is to bring lasting
material benefits to the broad masses, a willingness to grapple effectively with the population problem.
GROWING INTERNATIONAL TENSIONS

Western capitalism has whetted the appetites of people everywhere for the material comforts that the capitalistic engine makes
possible. It has thus sown the seeds of discontent that must be
present if peoples are to break with old and unproductive patterns
of action. But, so far, there is little evidence that it has made the
people in many parts of the world ready to create the vital intangibles essential to a productive and expanding capitalism. Voluntarism is suspect. Everything must be worked out according to
plan. The directives of the free price mechanism are to be controlled, its incentives damped. The capital and the know-how of
the capitalistic West, if sought at all, are sought as a right and on
political rather than on economic terms. Moreover, the markets of
the countries that have preserved their independence are too small
to permit the effective use of the mass production techniques that
characterize modern capitalism and make it so extraordinarily productive. Hence their efforts at industrialization, with or without
foreign aid, may well prove disappointing. In that event, the great
expectations aroused by the performance of capitalism, particularly
in the United States, may exhaust themselves in political turmoil
rather than in any permanent improvement in levels of living.
Russia's leaders apparently see in industrialization the road to
power rather than to human welfare, at least for the foreseeable
future. Having renounced foreign borrowing as a source of capital
formation, they are forced to squeeze savings out of the people in
their vast empire by the lash and the concentration camp. The rate
of capital formation is apparently considerable, but' the cost in human suffering is more than any free people would voluntarily undergo. Meantime the enormous annual increase in the population
in the area under Russian control makes improbable any appreciable
improvement in the general level of living.
In one important respect, however, the Russian industrialization
program has an advantage over that of the poor countries lying outside the Russian sphere of power. The Russian market is vast.
Hence the techniques of mass production can have full play within
the limits set by an inadequate transportation system. As this defect is remedied, Russia and her satellites will be able to secure
more and more of the technical advantages of the complex and

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

237

capitalistic division of labor. Under these circumstances many of
the small and independent nations that now look to us may turn
to Russia for help. Should that happen we may in time find ourselves alone in a hostile and poverty-stricken world mobilized under
fanatical Communist leadership. Our opponents will be poor in this
world's goods, but they will greatly outnumber us and they may
well possess instruments of destruction as deadly as our own.
In a later chapter we shall consider and appraise the official
American program for assisting the countries outside the Russian
orbit to develop their resources and raise their levels of living closer
to those prevailing here. It is a gigantic venture. The final outcome remains uncertain. But this much can be said with considerable confidence: The venture will not succeed unless those whom
we are attempting to help can be induced to lower drastically the
barriers they have erected around their national markets. And they
cannot be expected to do this unless we, in turn, are prepared to
open to them our own vast internal market.
Questions:
1. Explain the difference between "a level of living" and "a standard
of living" and indicate why national or regional per capita money
incomes cannot measure accurately differences in either levels or
standards. Is the inaccuracy likely to be greater with respect to levels
or to standards?
2. Which of the following statements appears to you to be more nearly
correct? Is there an element of truth in the other?
(a) "High real wages are the result of a high standard of living";
(b) "High real wages produce a high standard of living."
3. Identify the principal causes of persistent regional and international
differences in levels of living.
4. "The increase in regional and national differences in levels of living
which accompanied the development and spread of private capitalism
proves the correctness of the socialist indictment of the system as one
which starts out by exploiting its own workers and ends by exploiting
the workers in the backward countries."
(a) Is there any truth in the claim that the spread of private capitalism did, in fact, widen national differences in levels of living?
(b) Assuming the correctness of the claim, does the socialist conclusion necessarily follow? If not, what alternative explanation can you
suggest?
(c) Is the word "exploiting" used here in the same sense as you
defined exploitation in Question 10 of Chapter 16?

238

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

5. Identify the "Malthusian law of population growth." Has it been
disproved by developments subsequent to its formulation?
6. Argue for or against the validity of the following argument: "Wealthy
families in general have fewer children than poor families. This
relationship shows that, if a country is faced with the problem of
overpopulation, the government can solve the problem by taxing the
wealthy families and distributing the proceeds to the poor families."
7. Indicate your understanding of the word "overpopulation" which appears in the preceding question. How would you define "underpopulation" and "a population of optimum size"?

20
The State in a Market Economy

Mo FAR the role of the State has
been neglected in our analysis. In the stationary model it was implicitly assumed (a) that domestic law and order prevailed, (b)
that contracts and private property rights were scrupulously respected, and finally (c) that all transactions were carried out with
the use of a stable and universally accepted medium of exchange,
i.e., money. The general level of prices was supposed to remain
constant, while the rise and fall of individual prices, in response
to changes in consumer desires, directed resources to the firms most
fitted to execute the orders of the consumer.
Only a philosophical anarchist could possibly imagine a society
in which all of these conditions could be satisfied without compulsion. Robinson Crusoe got along without the State because he
was the State. Once a group of individuals begins to specialize and
to interchange their surpluses and to allow some scope for individual initiatives, rules have to be agreed upon, and an organization must be formed to administer them. The State is a social and
economic necessity.1
THE STATE AND THE PRIVATE FIRM
In Chapter 5 it was stated that the firm is the basic production
unit in a private enterprise economy but not the only one. In addition, a variety of nonprofit-making associations were recognizedchurches, lodges, philanthropic foundations, trade unions, etc., and,
last but not least, the State.
Similarities. In one sense the State is simply one of these asso1
This chapter is a condensation of John V. Van Sickle, Planning for the South: An
Inquiry into the Economics of Regionalism, Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville:

1943, Chap. I.
239

240

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

ciations. It resembles the business firm in a number of respects.
Its executive committee (the elective representatives of the voters
in a democracy, the privileged few in an oligarchy, the leader in
a totalitarian regime) appoints the principal administrative officers,
defines the production program for a period ahead, authorizes and
defines the terms on which the labor and resources necessary to the
execution of the plan shall be acquired, andfixesthe terms on which
the resulting public goods and services shall be offered to the citizen-consumers.
The State resembles nonprofit associations in these respects and,
in addition, in that the program and its execution are neither determined nor limited by purely profit considerations. The State's
objectives are more intangible. In a democracy these objectives may
be summed up in the phrase, the general welfare. Since the general
welfare is difficult to define and means different things to different
people, it is virtually impossible to get complete agreement among
the citizens as to whether the State is, in fact, realizing this objective. In a democratic society the assumption is that the political
votes of the citizens determine the composition of the executive
committee and inform the committee of what they want accomplished through State action. By counting the votes for and against
various proposals the executive committee is able to determine
what, for the time being, constitutes the general welfare. Thus the
citizen issues his instructions in two fashions. His dollar ballots go
to the managers of the firms; his political ballots go to his political
representatives.
Differences. The differences between the State and the private
firm are more striking than the resemblances, (a) The State is a
compulsory association, not a voluntary one. Membership in the
State is not optional as in the case of the firm. The individual is
either a voting stockholder or he is not, depending on the general
rule governing citizenship. (b) The individual may be required to
help defray the costs of production of publicly produced goods and
services even though he opposed their production and cannot use
them. He must pay taxes, and in addition he can be compelled to
make available property or to render certain services at rates of
remuneration lower than those at which a private firm could secure
them. The condemnation, i.e., the forced sale at a price set by public officials, of land to be used for a public purpose,2 jury service,
2
The democratic state frequently pays more than the market price in condemnation proceedings. This may be due to a desire to reduce popular resistance to a public building program or it may represent simple corruption.

THE STATE IN A MARKET ECONOMY

241

and compulsory military service provide examples of the use of resources at less than market prices, (c) The State can actually compel the individual to consume certain of its services (for example,
education). 3 (d) Since the State can compel the citizen to transfer to it any portion of his income that is required by "the general
welfare," it follows that it can also pay more for personal services
or for economic goods than private firms or associations would pay
for comparable services or comparable goods, (e) The State similarly is able to make available to citizens goods and services gratuitously or at prices that would bankrupt private firms.
Government purchases at above market rates necessarily affect the
prices that privatefirmswill have to pay for the remainder of the supply.
If the State's purchases are on a large enough scale it can, in effect, substitute a politically determined or "fiat" price for a market determined
price. The Walsh-Healey Act and the Federal Farm Support Program
provide examples of such a practice.
The quid pro quo or benefit principle of the market place does
not apply. If a citizen-consumer wants a product produced in the
private sector of the economy, he must offer enough dollars to induce a firm to produce it, and this sum must also be enough to
prevent other citizen-consumers from outbidding him. In general,
and within the limits of his income, he pays according to the benefits or satisfactions he expects to derive from the commodity in
question and to the sacrifices (of alternatives) that he must make.
Quite another principle applies with respect to the goods and services produced in the public sector of the economy. In this sector
the production decisions are reached by the casting of political
ballots, not dollar ballots, and each eligible citizen-consumer casts
but a single ballot. The rich man and the poor man exert the same
influence in the shaping of the final decision. Since the poor greatly
outnumber the rich, they can, if they wish, instruct the State to
provide gratuitously or at less than cost a wide array of goods and
services that private firms might otherwise be able to provide and,
in addition, instruct the State to assess the costs upon the wealthy
minority. The more the State approaches the form of a pure democracy, and the more the taxing system departs from the benefit
principle of assessing the costs of public services, the more tempting
it becomes for the masses to look to the State as the great provider.
3
It is more accurate to say that the State can compel the individual to spend a certain number of days each year for a certain number of years in an approved school.
The state cannot educate a man. It can merely force him to expose himself to the
educational process.

242

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

In brief, the State, because of these powers of compulsion is
under no necessity of observing the production rules mandatory to
a private firm. If private enterprise survives, it will be because the
majority of the people, as voters, decide that they prefer to look
to themselves and to voluntary associations rather than to the State
for most of the things they want. If the State arrogates to itself
the exclusive right to decide what shall be produced, if it undertakes to assign men to jobs, and to distribute rewards on the basis
of political decisions, private enterprise necessarily disappears.
Would this be followed by the disappearance of the individual
liberties (freedom of the press, of assembly, of belief, etc.) so painfully won in the age-long struggle against tyranny? There is no
unanimity among social scientists regarding the answer to this question. We shall come back to it in our study of alternatives to
Capitalism.
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE
This is not the place to review the many theories of the State
developed by philosophers with a view to discovering what are the
appropriate functions of the State in a free society. It suffices for
our purposes to note that public opinion must somehow be able
to reserve for the individual an area of free choice in matters affecting him as a worker, a saver, and a consumer if a private enterprise system is to operate effectively.
The theory of prices and competitive markets developed in the
preceding pages provides a means for distinguishing between public
measures consistent and inconsistent with the operating requirements of a vigorous and responsible private enterprise system. Contrary to popular opinion, this theory does not call for a do-nothing
policy on the part of government. True, the theory tells us what
the government should not do, but, equally important, it tells us
what the government should do in order that market prices may
direct resources into their highest and best uses and permit consumers to maximize the satisfactions obtainable with the incomes
they secure as resource owners.
The requirements of a market economy. The conditions that
must be reasonably satisfied if private enterprise is to discharge its
functions effectively were set forth in our earlier discussion of effective workable competition. They can be summed up in three
words: knowledge, mobility, and responsibility. After explaining
the meaning attached to these three words, we propose to show
that the State, in a market economy, is discharging its appropriate

THE STATE IN A MARKET ECONOMY

243

functions when it undertakes to see to it that these conditions, in
fact, prevail, or, where they cannot be brought into existence, that
substitutes are provided which make men wish to behave as though
the conditions were present.
Knowledge and mobility. For private initiatives to be trusted to
advance the general welfare, the parties concerned must have reasonable knowledge of the state of the market. Workers must know
about the relative earnings in different jobs and in different places
and must have the ability and the willingness to learn new skills
and to shift from lower-paid to higher-paid jobs, and from places
where the skills they possess or are capable of acquiring are in oversupply to places where they are in under-supply. This is known as
mobility. It follows that public expenditures for general and technical education designed to make men versatile and for the establishment of employment offices equipped to provide men with
knowledge of the labor market can improve the operation of the
private enterprise system.
The trade union and collective bargaining belong in the system
in so far as they give the individual worker the status and dignity
essential to democratic living. But if unionism obstructs the movement of men from lower-paid to higher-paid jobs or from declining
to expanding occupations, it weakens the system.
These two conditions of knowledge and mobility apply also to
savers and investors. They must have a reasonably broad and accurate view of alternatives. They must be prepared to withdraw
their investments from fields of declining profitability and direct
them, together with new savings, toward fields in which profits are
high. When they call on government to protect their positions in
the face of changes in consumer demand or of technological developments, they weaken the private enterprise system. They have
a right, however, to expect that those who seek to borrow their
resources shall tell the truth. Modern government may very properly take steps to make the capital market an honest market.
Fortunately, the private enterprise system does not require anything like complete knowledge and complete mobility to make it
workable. In an orderly society, spending habits are reasonably
stable. By far the largest proportion of the consumers' income is
spent year after year in much the same way. This stability in spending habits results in a corresponding stability in the demand for
labor and capital. It is not necessary that all resource owners should
have knowledge and be able and willing to shift their resources into
fields where scarcities exist. Small shifts in labor and capital, if they

244

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

are not prevented by man-made obstacles, will ordinarily be sufficient to do the job and thus keep rewards in different fields reasonably equal.
The first two assumptions of the private enterprise system are not
Utopian. The modern State can easily see to it that knowledge and
mobility exist to the degree needed to keep labor and capital markets reasonably fluid. This is simply another way of saying that
private capitalism requires competition, and that the democratic
State can enforce competition if the people really want it.
Responsibility. But however effective the State may be in promoting knowledge and mobility, there are situations which cannot
be cured by competition. Such situations arise whenever the laws
of private property permit a businessman to escape some of the inevitable but indirect costs of his way of doing business. In such
situations the principle of responsibility, which is the third requirement of the private enterprise system, is violated. Someone is getting something for nothing. Business costs are less than social costs.
The injured party must absorb the loss, or he must pass it on to
his friends and neighbors (charity) or to the State (relief), while
the other party to the transaction secures a gain to which he is not
entitled. If the other party, in this case the businessman, is himself
subject to competition, he will be forced to pass the gain on in
lower prices. But this does not mean that the problem should be
ignored. Unless it can be shown that these situations are rare or
quantitatively unimportant, the claim that the search for private
gain unintentionally but effectively promotes the general welfare
is seriously weakened.
The principle illustrated. There are many situations in which a
public intervention is required to re-establish the equilibrium between private and social costs. A few examples will serve to illustrate the principle of responsibility and to indicate the role of
government in enforcing it.
Industrial accidents. The problem of compensation for industrial
accidents immediately comes to mind. The human losses involved
are part of the social costs of getting goods and services produced.
Under the common law the injured party could sue for damages,
but the remedy was slow, expensive, and uncertain. The modern
State rightly imposes the costs on business, and the latter converts
it into a predictable burden that is added to its operating expenses
through insurance.
Nonconforming uses. City zoning provides another illustration.
It channels private initiative and prevents a property owner from

THE STATE IN A MARKET ECONOMY

245

utilizing his property in such a fashion as to reduce the value of
near-by properties. If the price mechanism permitted these injured
owners to measure the extent of the damage and to collect from the
responsible party, there might be no need for this limitation on
property rights.
Erosion offers still another example. We Americans have been
and are still destroying the precious top soil of a continent at a
rate that may reduce us to the status of a second-class nation in another generation or two. The farmer whose practices permit his
lands to wash away from under him destroys not merely his own
property but property values for miles around. The economic Me
of power dams has been reduced to fifteen years by silting. Rich
bottom lands have been ruined, and floods have carried havoc to
properties downstream. These are the results of improper farm
practices that would bankrupt the practitioners if the costs could be
pinned upon them. So far we have discovered no better method of
coping with this evil than the expensive educational bribes involved
in various federal agricultural programs. The individual states have
shirked their duty, which is to redefine the property rights in rural
lands in such fashion as to rule out these wasteful practices. In a
democracy, education must precede this use of the police power,
but, in the end, a democracy must have the courage to use this
power if it is to survive. The believer in private enterprise does the
institution a disservice when he opposes such measures out of a misguided respect for the "sanctity of private property." Private property will not survive if the many abuses arising out of situations in
which individuals escape the indirect costs of their actions are tolerated. A free enterprise society should make liberal use of what
the student of constitutional law calls "the police power."
These three examples, from the many which could be cited, will
suffice to illustrate the role of the State in the enforcement of the
principle of responsibility as applied to indirect costs.
Multiple-purpose enterprises. Equally important (and even more
unpopular with the rank and file of the conservative friends of
private enterprise) are the policy implications which arise when
an individual enterpriser is unable to collect from all those who
gain indirectly from his activities. In that event he has no inducement to push investment as far as would be socially desirable. Such
situations involve what may be called the positive aspect of the
principle of responsibility, in contrast to the negative aspect, as
illustrated by workmen's compensation laws, city zoning, and rural
erosion control.

246

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

Wherever an enterprise yields a multiplicity of benefits, the likelihood of underinvestment arises. A system of dams, for example,
may improve navigation, regularize stream flow, reduce flood damages, and increase the property values of riparian lands far distant
from the dam sites. Under private enterprise the building of dams
is limited by the profits to be secured from the sale of power, a
service which can be individualized and sold for a price. The substantial indirect benefits cannot be caught by this collection device.
Government, on the other hand, has at its disposal not only the
price mechanism but the general taxing power as well.
Essentially this is the theoretical justification for multiple-purpose
projects such as TVA, Hoover Dam, etc. Road building belongs in
this same category. Public education is also a multiple-purpose
activity in which there is sure to be relative under-investment if
exclusive reliance is placed upon fees. Public expenditures on
health can be justified under both the negative and positive aspects of the principle of responsibility. In brief, there is a large
field in which the optimum allocation of resources can be reached
only through a public intervention involving substantial public expenditures. Over a period of time, these expenditures, particularly
those in education and health, can have an enormously equalizing
influence on earned incomes.
It is to be noted that this principle does not provide an answer
to the administrative issue involved. It indicates that public support is necessary if the optimum is to be reached, and nothing more.
The equilibrium position can be reached through government subsidies to private enterprisers in multiple-purpose fields or through
public ownership. The correct decision in each case involves the
principle of comparative administrative advantages. Under which
auspices will the job be better done? The answer will differ from
country to country and from time to time.
Possible abuses of a sound principle. Unfortunately, these "secondary" benefits defy accurate evaluation. There is always the danger of pushing investment beyond the "social optimum." This
overinvestment is waste. The recent enthusiasm for public spending as a cure-all for every sort of dislocation greatly increases the
risks that a sound principle will be abused. Most of the abuses
are taken at the behest of groups adversely affected by dynamic
changes. American cotton farmers insist on their right to grow
more cotton than American and world consumers are prepared to
take at a price that will yield them a decent living. They demand
"parity" prices and then, having legislated themselves out of world

THE STATE IN A MARKET ECONOMY

247

markets and finding their domestic markets threatened by synthetic substitutes, they flirt with the idea of asking the Congress
to impose a tax on rayon and other substitutes high enough to make
consumers aware of their duty to cotton and to its producers. Manufacturers whose low profit margins record the consumers' verdict
that the capital and labor tied up in their enterprises should be
shifted to other fields of endeavor call on their Congressmen for
protection. Laborers whose jobs or rates of pay are threatened by
the emergence of competition in areas where prevailing rates of pay
are lower than theirs demand the protection of fair wage laws. If
the competition comes from abroad, they unite with the manufacturers in demanding tariff protection and, in addition, insist that
the low-wage workers be kept out of the country. It is obvious
that no economic system can be expected to perform satisfactorily
when it is subjected to such demands as these.
The trouble is that producers ask government subsidies so that
they may continue doing what no longer needs doing, instead of
asking only that the State assist them to find new and needed outlets for their skills and their capitals. There is a place for government aid in our modern and complex society, but this aid should be
directed at easing and humanizing the adjustments continuously
required in a dynamic and free society. The more resolutely public
policy is based on adjustment, the more generously can public
spending proceed. Every program, not clearly justified as a means
of increasing knowledge and mobility, and of enforcing the principle of responsibility, should be capable of satisfying this test question: Does it assist individuals to make the adjustments which they
would make if they knew all the facts and possessed the ability to
act? In other words "adjustment" and not "security" should be the
keynote of public policy in a society based on private enterprise.
Security, like happiness, is a by-product of human endeavor. In
seeking for it directly we appear to have increased enormously the
instability and insecurity of life in general. Adjustment, on the
other hand, is dynamic and positive; it implies a goal, of course,
but as long as we keep the system of private enterprise, we do
not have to rely on our elected officials to lay down the goal. The
price system does that. The task of our lawmakers and our officials is to provide the legal and social institutions that will enable
us to make the necessary adjustments for ourselves.
The next four chapters are devoted to the problem of money.
We shall see that the State has a large role to play in this field.

248

LESS-THAN-PURELY COMPETITIVE CONDITIONS

Questions:
1. Define "the State" and enumerate the principal differences between it
and the private firm.
2. Identify the conditions that must be reasonably satisfied if the search
for private gain is really to promote the general welfare. Indicate by
examples what the State can properly do to create the necessary
conditions.
3. "Traditional or orthodox economic theory provided the basis for the
political theory of Liberalism as that term was understood by the
drafters of the American Constitution." State what you understand
to have been the political theory of Liberalism of the drafters of the
Constitution and argue for or against the validity of the statement.
4. "The much-abused term 'laissez-faire,' properly understood, neither
implies nor calls for a do-nothing policy on the part of the State. It
tells us, it is true, what the State should not do; but no less important,
it tells us what the State should do to maintain a responsible private
enterprise system." Explain and illustrate.
5. "The argument for state interventions based on recognition of the
existence of indirect benefits may be theoretically correct, but it lends
itself so easily to political abuses that economists who believe in the
desirability of maintaining the private enterprise system would do
well to drop the principle from their kit of analytical tools."
(a) Identify the principle and indicate why it lends itself to political
abuses.
(b) Suggest a politico-economic formulation of the principle that
might meet the objection to it as politically dangerous.

PART FOUR

Banking ana the Monetary
Circuit

21
JMoney and the Price Level

A HE treatment of production and
distribution up to this point has largely disregarded the role of
money and credit. The problem was analyzed as though goods and
services were bartered directly for other goods and services. The
exchange value of any particular good or its power to command
other goods in peaceful exchange was said to depend, at any moment of time, upon its marginal utility. The analysis was developed
as if goods and services were exchanged directly for one another on
the basis of their marginal utilities.
Say's Law. The clearest expression of this barter concept goes
back to a French economist, Jean Baptiste Say.1 He argued that
supply—what was produced by specialists—was always equal to
demand—what was demanded by specialists—since every article
produced was at one and the same time a part of total supply and
a part of total demand. When the farmer brought his wheat to
market, the wheat increased the supply of this cereal, but since it
constituted the farmer's means of payment, it also increased the
demand for the products of the tailor, the blacksmith, and of other
specialists. The specialist could always exchange his surplus for
surpluses produced by other specialists, although the terms of the
exchange might not be to his liking. Indeed, it was quite possible
that what he brought to the market might be so little desired by
other specialists that he could not get enough in exchange to keep
body and soul together. In that event, it was up to him to make
something else that was scarcer and, therefore, more valuable. If
he refused to sell his specialty, whether it was a commodity or his
own personal services, at this unfavorable rate of exchange, then he
became unemployed, but voluntarily unemployed. If the State
1

Traite d'Economie Politique (1803).

251

252

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

would refrain from interfering, there could be no such thing as
general overproduction or general involuntary unemployment. The
impersonal pressures of the market would force specialists to devote
their resources, including their labor, to the production of those
goods and services that were in relatively short supply to the benefit both of themselves and of the community at large. The periodic
complaints regarding general overproduction and mass unemployment grew out of confused thinking. According to Say, they were
impossible for the simple reason that supply and demand are merely
two aspects of the same thing. Supply is demand and demand is
supply.
The Mercantilist and money. Say's analysis, it will be seen,
completely disregards money. For this reason it has been much
criticized by modern economists. And, indeed, it is an oversimplification. Goods and services are exchanged first for money, and
only after a lapse of time is the second half of the transaction completed by the exchange of the money for other goods and services.
We shall find that this intermediate money-step introduces complications that must be taken into account. Nonetheless, the doctrine constituted a valuable antidote to the exaggerations of the
Mercantilists. The Mercantilists held, it will be recalled, that the
primary purpose of foreign trade was to sell to foreigners more than
was bought from foreigners so that the nation might obtain gold
and silver, which were the money commodities of the period. A
nation was thought to be enriched by an influx of the precious
metals and impoverished by their loss. A major objective of public
policy was to develop a "favorable balance of trade."
There was some foundation of truth in this Mercantilist doctrine,
viewed in the light of the conditions prevailing at the time. The
nations of Europe were warring with one another continuously.
They made large use of hired mercenaries, and allies could be
bought for gold and silver. Furthermore, production and commerce
were expanding rapidly as strong central governments leveled the
innumerable internal barriers to trade characteristic of feudal Europe. Lacking the developed banking systems of a later period,
there was an urgent need for increasing supplies of metallic money
to handle the growing volume of exchanges. Most of the European
countries could obtain these metals only through trade with countries forunate enough to have mines within their territories or in the
colonies under their control. It is not surprising, therefore, that
the Mercantilist authors, who were for the most part practical men
of affairs, took it more or less for granted that the primary objec-

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

253

tive of national commercial policy was to secure a "favorable balance of trade."
In their efforts to demonstrate that international trade benefited
both parties to the exchanges, Adam Smith, J. B. Say, and the economists of the emerging Liberalism found it necessary to combat the
mercantilistic preoccupation with the "balance of trade." This led
them, in turn, to understate the role of money in the development
of the complex division of labor, but they were a good deal nearer
the truth than were the Mercantilists.
SPECIALIZATION REQUIRES MONEY

Adam Smith stated that the division of labor is limited by the
extent of the market. But it is equally true that the extent of the
market is limited by the excellence of the medium of exchange.
Even the most simple division of labor, involving more than two
households, is tremendously handicapped if the exchanges have to
be carried out on the basis of barter.
Consider, for example, the complications that would arise if a
farmer brought a pig to market with a view to bringing back a pair
of shoes for the baby, a spool of thread for his wife, a new scythe,
and a five-pound sack of salt. Even this simple problem cannot be
solved without the use of money. Consequently, we find evidences
of the use of money in the earliest records of history.
The functions of money. A good money performs four important
functions, (a) It serves as a medium of exchange, thus enabling a
society to avoid the impossible complications of direct barter, (b)
Equally important, it provides a standard of value, a common denominator so that one can compare the exchange values of thousands of different commodities and services, one with another. If
commodity A is worth 1 unit of gold, commodity B, 2 units, commodity C, 3 units, etc., then we know that commodity C will command 3 units of commodity A and 1M units of commodity B, etc.
The exchange value of a commodity when expressed in terms of
money is known as its price, (c) Another service of money is to
provide a standard for deferred payments. I own a house from
which I wish to derive an income. I can sell it outright for cash or
I can accept a 10 percent down payment and agree to accept the
balance in installments spread over 5, 10, or any number of years
that is mutually agreeable to myself and the purchaser (with interest on the unpaid balance). Or again I may elect to lease it for 49
years after which the property will revert to me. An enormous
number of business transactions involve the rendering of a present

254

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

service or the delivery of a present good against payment in the
future. A money is good for such transactions if its value (a term
which will be explained presently) is expected to remain approximately the same over the period of time involved in the transaction,
(d) Finally a good money serves as a store of value. The seller of
a commodity or a service seldom wants to spend the money instantly and entirely for other goods and services, despite the fact
that the ultimate purpose of the transaction is to gain not money
but goods and services. Most of us want to plan ahead; we may
want to buy something expensive which may involve saving for a
considerable period of time. Money is a convenient form in which
to accumulate savings.2
Money defined. Money is any commodity that is generally accepted in exchange for goods and services. The list of commodities
that at one time or another served as money is long. Wampum was
a favored money of exchange of the American Indians. The
Haitians used hollow gourds, and their national money today is
known as the gourd. In the course of time, two metals survived in
the competition of commodities for the role of money—gold and
silver.
They survived because of certain characteristics that peculiarly
fitted them for this role. They were durable, noncorrosive, relatively scarce, but not too scarce, and capable of being shaped into
articles of practical use. They could take a high polish and thus
catered to man's love of beauty and to his vanity. Experience
showed that anyone who possessed gold or silver never needed to
starve or go naked or cold. The difficulty of increasing the total
supply made them reliable commodities for a seller to accept and
hold, pending a decision as to what he wanted to buy in exchange.
Moreover, the metals could be cut and shaped (coined) into units
of convenient size and weight, and, by appropriate markings, the
weight and purity of the metal in a unit could be guaranteed to
anyone to whom they were offered in exchange. In due time the
sovereign authority in each politically independent state undertook
to provide coins of standard weight and purity and to reserve to
itself the exclusive right of coinage. The use of the metals as money
increased and stabilized the demand for them and hence increased
their usefulness in their new role.
Bimetallism. At the beginning of the 19th century both gold and
2
Many economists regard with some misgivings this characteristic of money because
it permits what they call hoarding and hoarding is supposed to cause unemployment.
We shall come back to this point later.

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

255

silver served as standard moneys in most of the countries of Western civilization. There were inconveniences, however, in this arrangement. A government might declare that its money of account
would consist of so many grains of fine gold or so many grains of
fine silver, but it was not always able to enforce its edict. In the
bullion or metal market the ratios at which the two exchanged
might depart slightly from the ratio fixed by the coinage law. In
that event, the metal that was undervalued as money would disappear from circulation. An example will illustrate how the process
works and how rapidly it works.
For many years the American dollar was declared by law to
consist of 23.22 grains of fine gold or 371.25 grains of fine silver.
There were thus 16 times as many grains of fine silver in a United
States silver dollar as there were grains of fine gold in the gold
dollar. Any one with silver bullion could take it to the United
States mint, have it coined into silver dollars for a very small charge
(seniorage), and exchange the silver dollars for gold dollars at the
ratio of one to one. The converse was also true. All commercial
transactions and all taxes could be paid in either gold or silver dollars. The coinage law thus declared that one grain of fine gold was
worth 16 grains of fine silver. After the discovery of gold in California in 1849, the rate at which the two metals exchanged in the
"bullion" market, i.e., in the market in which they were bought and
sold for nonmonetary purposes, slowly turned against gold. Consider now the situation when the rate of exchange in the "bullion
market" had fallen to 15 to 1. Under these circumstances no new
silver coming from the mines would be sold to the United States
mint, where it was undervalued, and no gold would be sold in the
bullion market. On the contrary, any one with, say, $10,000 in gold
coin could (as any student with paper and pencil can figure out for
himself) make a quick profit of roughly $660 by engaging in the
following transactions:
(1) exchanging his $1,000 gold at the United States mint for
$1,000 silver;
(2) trading his silver dollars (as metal) in the bullion market
for gold bars;
(3) taking the gold bars to the mint and exchanging them for
gold dollars.
Transaction number 3 would yield the dealer $1,660 gold. Aussuming that it required two weeks to complete these transactions, a
speculator could turn his money over 26 times in a year and make a

256

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

gross profit of $17,160—quite a nice return on a completely riskless
$10,000 investment. It is not surprising that silver was rapidly
drained out of the monetary circulation, leaving the country, in
effect, on an exclusively gold standard.
This tendency for the legally overvalued, or cheaper money, to
drive the dearer, or undervalued money out of circulation is known
as Greshams Law. Sir Thomas Gresham was the British Chancellor
of the Exchequer under the Queen Elizabeth of Shakespeare's time.
He is credited with the authorship of the phrase, "cheap money
drives out good money" in connection with a report he made to the
puzzled Queen on the reason why good, full-weight coins were
always disappearing from circulation, being replaced by debased
or underweight coins.
So powerful was this tendency that one country after another
gave up the hopeless attempt to keep the two metals in circulation.
By the last quarter of the 19th century all of the great industrial
countries of the world had abandoned bimetallism in favor of monometallism, and the metal was gold. The United States abandoned
silver in 1873 as the result of a routine Act of the Congress which
was later dubbed "the Crime of 1873" by those who explained the
depression and the declining prices of the 1890's as due to an inadequate money supply.
Legal tender. Gold became the money of the West because the
public accepted and trusted it and not because the governments
decreed that it should serve as money.
Legal money is anything that a government declares to be
money. But for it to serve as money, people must have confidence
that the supply of the commodity will not be greatly increased or
decreased over short periods of time. Given this belief, the State
can increase the acceptability of a commodity by declaring that it
will be received for taxes and other public payments. The commodity thereby gains limited legal tender. The government may
further require that the commodity shall be accepted in payment
of all private obligations, in which event it is said to possess full
legal tender.8 If the creditor refuses to accept the commodity, the
debtor is regarded as discharged of his legal obligation.
A scrap of paper can be made legal tender. There are at present
300 odd million "greenbacks" or United States notes outstanding
from the Civil War period.
3 For the convenience of creditors a government may provide that subsidiary coins
such as pennies need not be accepted when offered in excessive amounts, say 100 or 500.

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

257

These notes were printed and used by the federal government to pay
the soldiers and contractors. They had to accept the paper, and in turn
others had to accept the notes from them. This was "printing press"
money. After the war the amount outstanding was reduced as the paper
was received for taxes until a law was passed requiring that new notes
be printed to replace those received by the government.
The dollar. Section 8 of Article I of our Federal Constitution
gives the Congress the exclusive power "to coin money" and "regulate the value thereof." The term "dollar" was adopted to describe
the official money of the United States, and it was provided by law
as has already been noted that the dollar should consist of 23.22
grains of fine gold or 371.25 grains of fine silver.4 This meant that
the mint price of gold was $20.67 per ounce.5 The law required
that the government buy at this price all the gold presented to the
mint by giving the seller gold coin or gold certificates. The gold
certificate looked very much like the bank notes that circulated at
the time. It was a promise of the United States Government to pay
on demand to the bearer $5 in gold, or $10, or whatever the denomination of the certificate called for. The gold to back up the promise
could not be used for any other purpose. Anyone who needed gold
for any purpose could present gold certificates to the Treasury and
obtain the gold either in the form of coins or bars. The same rule
applied to silver until it was demonetized in 1873.

THE INTERNATIONAL GOLD STANDARD
A country is said to be on the complete gold standard when it
undertakes to buy and sell gold freely at a fixed price and to allow
its citizens to hold gold coin or gold bars if they so desire. No government is on such a standard today. We are still on the gold
standard, however, with respect to foreign countries, in that foreign
persons or foreign governments that have dollar claims can insist
upon being paid in gold.
During the half century preceding World War I, most of the
4
This is the famous 16 to 1 ratio. The country was on a bimetallic standard. Actually,
because of the softness of the pure metals, the standard coins contained a small amount
of a cheaper and harder alloy metal which gave the gold dollar a weight of 25.5 grains
of gold nine-tenths fine, and the silver dollar a weight of 412.5 grains of silver nine-tenths

fine.
5

An ounce of gold contains 480 grains of pure gold. Therefore 480 grains were
enough to make 20.67 gold dollars (480 divided by 23.22 equals 20.67). Anyone who
brought $20.67 in gold dollars to the mint could obtain 100 troy ounces of pure gold
in exchange, and vice versa. Actually gold dollars were never coined because they would
have been inconveniently small. Five-, ten-, and twenty-dollar gold pieces, however,
were in circulation until the beginning of 1934.

258

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

important industrial countries were on the complete gold standard.
This fact automatically created an international monetary standard.
Thus for many years the British Government undertook to buy or
sell standard gold, which in this case meant gold eleven-twelfths
fine at the rate of £ 3 , 17s, 10 l/2d, per ounce. This meant that
there was 4.87 times as much fine gold in the pound sterling as in
the gold dollar and $4.87 represented the par of exchange.
The French mint price was 3447.74 francs per kilogram of gold;
the German price was 2790 marks per kilogram. And so it went for
all the other countries that based their money on gold. The French
definition of the franc made it worth just over 18 cents, whereas the
German mark was worth about 24 cents. Every money in the system had a par of exchange with every other money in the system.
The day-to-day divergencies from "parity" could never exceed the
actual cost of shipping gold from one country to another.
The international gold standard of the 19th century was destroyed by World War I. An attempt was made to re-establish it
during the 1920s, but it again collapsed in The Great Depression of
the 1930s, and opinion in expert circles is now divided regarding
the desirability of even attempting to restore it. We shall consider the case for and against its restoration after we have examined
the economics of international trade.
THE VALUE OF MONEY
The Constitution, as we have seen, states that the Congress of
the United States shall have the exclusive power to coin money and
regulate its value. The fixing of the price of the dollar at $35 an
ounce in 1934 was done under this authority, but this is not the
same thing as fixing the value of money.
The value of money is what a unit of money will buy in goods
and services. It is its purchasing power. The purchasing power of
money, therefore, depends on the prices of goods and services. The
higher the general level of prices, the lower is the value of money;
the lower the price level, the higher the value of money. The value
of money varies inversely with the price level.
The equation of exchange. Changes in the value of money or in
the general level of prices P are related to changes in three other
variables: transactions T, the volume of money M, and the frequency with which the monetary units are exchanged for goods and
services in a given period of time.
The following formula, which is known as the equation of ex-

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

259

change, is widely used to indicate these relationships: MV = PT.
The monetary theory of prices expressed by this formula is
known as the quantity theory of money. (It is presented here in its
crudest form; refinements will be introduced later.) The formula
states that (a) if the volume of transactions involving money T increases (or decreases),6 while the supply of money M and its
velocity of circulation V remain unchanged, the general level of
prices P will fall (or rise); (b) that, if the quantity of money M
increases (or decreases) while its velocity of circulation V and the
volume of transactions T remain unchanged, the general level of
prices P will rise (or fall); (c) that, if velocity of circulation
changes while the money supply and the volume of transactions
remain unchanged, the price level will change and in the same
direction.
A rise in the price level is tantamount to a fall in the value of
money; a fall in the price level is equivalent to a rise in the value
of money.
The preceding formula is a truism; i.e., it must be correct if the
assumptions behind it are correct. The assumptions are that a
change in any one of the variables M, V, and T will not cause a
change in the other two. In that event the change must work itself
out in an appropriate change in P. But, in fact, the three variables
are not completely independent one of another, as will appear in
our discussion of the business cycle. Nonetheless, the equation is
useful in that it helps to make clear the meaning of the term "the
value of money" and the factors that must be controlled by any
government that undertakes to determine the future course of
prices.
Measuring the value of money: The price index. In the United
States the price of the dollar can be changed only by law. But in
a private enterprise economy the prices of most commodities and
services can and do change at frequent intervals. If some commodities rise in price while others fall in price, we know that their relative exchange values have been altered. Some are worth more,
some less. But how are we to say whether these changes have
altered the value of money?
The usual method is through the use of a comprehensive price
index. A price index is a statistical device for indicating the overall
6 In general T tends to vary directly with changes in the quantity of currently produced goods and services, but not proportionately, since many transactions involve land
and durable goods produced earlier.

260

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

result of changes of varying amounts in the prices of an array of
goods.7 The prices of a certain year are gathered and the average
of all the prices in the array is given the value 100. Then, from
time to time, the items in the array are repriced and the average
calculated and expressed as a percentage of the average for the
base year. Thus suppose that the average of the prices of 20 items
in the base year amounted to $20, and that one year later the average was $18, and two years later $22. The magnitude of the overall change would be expressed as follows:

Year
Base year
Year 1
Year 2

Average of
20 Items
$20
18
22

Index Number
100
90
110

Out of a confusing variety of price changes, some upward, some
downward, some large and some small, some involving expensive
items, some involving items worth only a few pennies, is distilled a
single value that is supposed to indicate the magnitude of the overall change.8
Consumers price index. For purposes of determining whether the
value of money has changed a broad price index is generally used. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, for
example, publishes a consumers' price index which shows average
changes in retail prices of selected goods, rents, and services, weighted
by quantities bought in the period 1934-36 by families of wage earners
and moderate-income workers in large cities. The items priced represent
about 70 per cent of the expenditures of families whose incomes at that
time averaged $1524. The index numbers for selected years were as follows: 9
7
The problems of selecting and weighting the items and the type of average to be
used are discussed in all standard textbooks on statistical methods.
8
Changes of all sorts are indicated by the use of index numbers. There are farm
price index numbers, bond and stock price indexes, metal and textile price indexes,
indexes to show changes in the outputs of literally hundreds of commodities at
wholesale and at retail, etc. Wage rate changes and changes in average hours worked
per day, week and year can be conveniently shown in this fashion.
9
Recently the base for this price index has been shifted to a more recent post-World
War II period and the composition of the index has been changed to take account
of consumers' goods that were unknown or unimportant in the budgets of moderate
income families in the 1934-36 period. For the time being both indexes are shown in
government statistics. The one shown in the text has the advantage of revealing price
changes over a 40-year period.

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

261

TABLE 21-1
CONSUMERS' PRICE INDEX

(1935-39 = 100)
1913
1918
1920
1921
1929
1933

70.7
107.5
143.3
127.7
122.5
92.4

1938
1941
1945
1946
1952
1953

100.8
105.2
128.4
153.3
191.1
192.6

Wholesale price index. The following chart (Fig. 21-1) shows the
over-all fluctuations of wholesale prices during the period 1919-1953
inclusive. It is calculated monthly by The Guaranty Trust Company of New York, and published in The Guaranty Survey, the
monthly house journal of the bank. The monthly prices are measured against those of 1926.
Between 1913 and 1920 retail prices in the United States more
than doubled and the value of the dollar was cut in half. By 1933
prices had fallen 45 percentage points from their 1920 high; $92.40
would buy as much as $143.30 thirteen years earlier. Then began
a slow rise in prices or, what comes to the same thing, a slow fall
in the value of the dollar until the outbreak of the war. Between
1938 and 1950 a price revolution took place that was almost as
violent as that occurring between 1913 and 1920.
It is apparent from this review of prices that the P or general
level of prices in the formula MV = PT has fluctuated wildly over
the last generation. The constant price level assumed in explaining
the behavior of firms is conspicuously absent in the real world.
Why has it fluctuated so much? What are the social and economic
consequences of these fluctuations? What behavior of prices over
a period of time is desirable? If agreement on a desirable behavior
of prices can be reached, what can government do to help realize
it?
We shall attempt to answer these questions in this and succeeding chapters.
INFLATION AND DEFLATION
The words "inflation" and "deflation," like so many of the terms
used by economists, are ambiguous. They may be used to describe
changes in the money supply or changes in the value of money, i.e.,
changes in the price level. Some economists hold that inflation oc-

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

262
8 §

8 8 6 8 3 1

^ n r i i i i § 12 § s § s

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

263

curs when the money supply is increased, regardless of whether or
not there has been any increase in prices. Those who take this position center their attention on the M in the equation of exchange.
Inflation and deflation consist of increases and decreases in M. If
these changes produce no change in P, it is because of equal and
opposite changes in V and T, separately or in combination. Those
who use the terms to describe price changes center their attention
on the P in the equation of exchange. Inflation and deflation consist
of increases and decreases in P. They would deny that there has
been any inflation, if an increase in M produces no increase in P,
as is perfectly possible if the increase in M is offset by an equal and
opposite change in V and T, separately or in combination. We shall
use the terms to describe price level changes. Both groups, however, are in agreement that a large and abrupt increase in the
volume of money M will produce a large increase in the price level
P in an economy in which resources are fully employed.
Economists differ regarding the relative merits of a stable price
level, as against a slowly rising or a slowly falling price level. All
are agreed, however, that in a private enterprise economy most individual prices must be allowed to fluctuate freely within the framework of the overall price behavior they favor, and that the overall
change in the general level of prices should not and need not be
allowed to assume runaway proportions.
Our interest in this chapter is not with the forces responsible for
abrupt and large changes in the general price level, but with the
social and economic consequences of such changes.
The social and economic consequences of large general price
changes. Anyone who has lived through a period of rapid inflation
or deflation does not need to be persuaded that large and abrupt
price level changes are undesirable.
Rapidly rising prices bring about abrupt and brutal alterations in
the personal distribution of incomes. Those living on fixed incomes
suffer severely. The old are the particular victims of inflation. Millions in this country live on modest pensions or annuities which
were built up by weekly or monthly contributions from their wages
or salaries. These contributions represented goods and services that
they might have enjoyed at the time or savings that they might
have invested in common stocks or in real estate. The real goods
and services they gave up when the value of money was high vastly
exceed those they can buy in their old age with their low-value
pension or annuity payments. Holders of long-term bonds and
mortgages suffer in similar fashion. Wage earners, particularly the

264

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

salaried workers, may find their real incomes cut because of the
lag of wages and salaries behind prices. In general, creditors suffer
in periods of rising prices.
Conversely, debtors gain by rising prices. On balance, business
firms are among the gainers since they have bonds and mortgages
outstanding and they pay wages, salaries, and bills for materials
only after a certain delay. One's judgment regarding the relative
merits of slowly rising and slowly falling prices is likely to depend
on his judgment regarding the relative importance of creditors and
debtors in the economy. Business sentiment is optimistic in times
of rising prices. To the extent that this favors risk-taking investment, creeping inflation may contribute to full employment, if it
can be kept from getting out of hand.
Does government gain or lose by inflation? The burden of a
public debt is reduced by rising prices. In extreme cases of inflation, the debt is, to all intent and purposes, wiped out. Extreme
inflation is thus a form of capital levy. But since the government
is all the people, this merely means that what the taxpayers gain,
the bondholders lose. Government, as government, can neither gain
nor lose as a result of changes in the price level.
Once inflation gets really out of hand it is extremely hard to
check. The government finds it increasingly difficult to raise the
revenues to meet its current expenditures because of the inevitable
lag between the earning of money by firms and by individuals and
the payment of direct taxes on the portion that is taxable. In
Austria, after the tempo of inflation had become very rapid, it was
discovered that the costs of collecting the income taxes due on incomes earned in the preceding year actually exceeded the amounts
due from the taxpayers.
A precipitous fall in prices can be just as disastrous as a precipitous rise. As we shall see later, considerable unemployment is likely
to follow a large collapse of prices. The goods and services that the
unemployed might have produced represent a serious loss. Creditors gain as long as their debtors remain solvent, but before the
deflation has gone very far, creditors are forced to compromise with
their debtors or see them go into bankruptcy, after which they too
are forced to share in the general misery.
In the next five chapters we continue the study of the problem of
inflation and deflation with particular reference to the forces that
cause the supply of money to fluctuate, and to the possibility of
controlling the price level within the institutional framework of
private enterprise.

MONEY AND THE PRICE LEVEL

265

Questions:
1. Identify the following:
Say's law—barter—monometallism—bimetallism—Gresham's Law—legal
tender money—the gold standard—inflation—deflation—index numbers.
2. Compare Adam Smith's views regarding money with those of the
Mercantilists and explain the statement, "There was an element of
truth in the Mercantilists' views on money."
3. Define money; identify the functions it performs in an economy based
on specialization and exchange and the characteristics that long made
gold the almost universal monetary metal.
4. "Fixing the price of the dollar is not the same as fixing the value of
the dollar." What is the difference? How are we to know whether
the value of the dollar has changed between Period 1 and Period 2?
5. What is the equation of exchange and what is meant by saying that
it is a truism? If it is a truism, what purposes, if any, does it serve?
6. Identify the social groups that benefit in the short-run from rising
prices and explain why they benefit.
7. Argue for or against the validity of the following line of reasoning:
"It is generally agreed that individual prices must be allowed to
change in response to changes in supply and demand if the private
enterprise system is to operate satisfactorily. It follows therefore that
any attempt to stabilize the general price level is inconsistent with
the requirements of the system/'

22
Banking Operations and
the Price Level

AT is a matter of relatively little
importance whether a country has a high or a low general level
of prices. The important thing is that wages, interest, rents and
profits, in money terms, are in proper functional relationship to one
another and to the price level. What is objectionable from the
point of view of the general welfare are large and abrupt changes
in the price level.
Our concern in the next four chapters is with the problem of controlling the price level. We want to know whether it is technically
possible for a modern democratic government to control the behavior of the money supply so that the economy can expand and
operate at a high level of efficiency and, at the same time, be protected from abrupt price level changes. The word "technically" was
deliberately introduced into this statement of the problem. There
may be political considerations which will render impossible a type
of control that would realize the long-run price policy which the
public may desire and that would be, from a technical point of
view, entirely workable.
In the next chapter we shall develop a series of monetary models
designed to show how a government could control the volume of
money so as to maintain a stable price level or a slowly rising or a
slowly falling price level. These models will also indicate the role
that gold and private banking would play in the execution of a
price level policy. We shall assume throughout this part of the
analysis that the economy operates continuously at the full employment level. Then in three later chapters we shall examine the forces
that produce fluctuations in the volume of employment and con266

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

267

sider whether monetary management may be, in part, responsible
for these fluctuations and, if so, what modifications of the findings
derived from our monetary models may be necessary if public
opinion should decide that full employment is a more important
social objective than price level control.
But before we can develop our monetary models it is necessary
that the reader should have some understanding of modern banking
operations. This is the subject matter of the present chapter.
INVESTMENT BANKING
There are two main types of banks in the United States today:
investment banks * and commercial banks. Investment banking can
be disposed of very briefly, since the activities of such banks have
relatively little effect upon the supply of money or its velocity of
circulation. They accept the money of individuals who expect to
leave the money on deposit for some time, pay interest on these
"deposits," and lend the proceeds to governments, private firms, and
individuals for relatively long periods of time. The funds going to
business are used primarily for the building of plant and the purchase of durable equipment. Business may secure the funds
through borrowing or the sale of equities (common and preferred
stock). The funds going to government may be used to build roads,
school houses, etc., or simply to finance public deficits resulting
from the excess of public expenditures over public taxes. Mortgage
loans for home building come largely from this source. In so far as
commercial banks supply funds for these purposes, it is through
separate departments. We shall treat these operations of commercial banks as belonging within the field of investment banking.
The primary function of investment banking is to mobilize the
savings of millions of individuals and make them available for the
expansion of the community's real capital. They constitute a vital
link in the saving-investment process. They affect primarily the
direction of flow of money funds and not the volume of the flow.
Through their continuous search for profitable investment opportunities, these institutions speed up the processes by which resources are kept in their highest and best uses.
The profits of these financial institutions depend on their ability
to discover investment opportunities that yield a higher rate of
return than the rates they are forced to pay to attract "deposits."
1
Building and loan associations, savings banks, investment trusts, etc., fall in the
investment banking category.

268

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

The familiar forces of supply and demand are at work here as in
every other sector of a free market.
COMMERCIAL BANKING

Before explaining how commercial banks in a modern economy
can influence the volume of money and its velocity of circulation,
certain banking terms and banking operations must be understood.
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to this subject. We shall
then return to the main topic.
A commercial bank. A commercial bank is a private firm organized for the purpose of making money for its owners. It belongs
in the industry category "finance, insurance, and real estate," to
which reference was made in Chapter 5. It produces not goods but
services. These services are of three sorts: exchanging credits, keeping records, and creating credit. The significance of these services
will become clear as we proceed.
The bank's balance sheet. A bank's assets typically consist of its
plant and equipment ("other assets"); the legal tender money in
its physical possession (currency on hand); its "deposits" with other
banks; the notes and promises to pay of customers (loans and discounts ); and the stocks and bonds of corporations and governments
(investments). Its liabilities are the deposits of customers (demand
deposits);2 notes outstanding (in countries which permit their commercial banks to issue notes);3 any due but unpaid bills ("other liabilities"); and, finally, the equities of the owners as represented by
the common stock outstanding (capital stock) and any past earnings not distributed as dividends (surplus and undivided profits).
These assets and liabilities must always be in balance since the
assets represent the marketable values of everything owned by the
bank and the liabilities represent the claims of persons against these
marketable values. A bank's balance sheet, which always bears a
precise date, is nothing but an orderly arrangement of assets (always indicated in bank statements as "resources") and liabilities
designed to show that they do, in fact, balance. A simplified balance sheet will look like this:
2
Most banks will have time as well as demand deposits, but since the uses to which
a bank may put these deposits conform with those described in the discussion of investment banking, and are governed by different considerations and different government
regulations, there will be no further mention of them in this chapter.
3
Private commercial banks in the United States have not issued their own notes since
the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1914. We nonetheless include them
here so as to make clear their place in the banking process.

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

269

THE PRUDENTIAL BANK OF MIDDLETOWN

Statement of Conditions, April 30, 1953
(Balance Sheet No. 1)
Resources

Liabilities

Currency on hand . . $ 75,000
Deposits at other
banks
325,000
Loans and discounts
500,000
Investments
80,000
Other assets
20,000
Total
1,000,000

Demand deposits .. $ 450,000
Notes outstanding ..
100,000
Capital stock
250,000
Surplus and imdivided profits . . .
195,000
Other liabilities . . . .
5,000
Total
1,000,000

Deposits. An individual who takes currency or checks to the
bank enters the amount on a deposit slip, hands both to a "teller,"
and receives in return a "deposit" book with an entry showing the
amount of the transaction. He may leave, thinking that he has
money in the bank. In law this is not so. If the bank should fail
one hour after he handed in his money, he could not get it back
even if he were able to show that it was still in the teller's drawer.
All he has is a claim on the assets of the bank, and the value of his
claim will have to wait upon a court determination of the value of
the assets in liquidation. If the equities of the stockholders are
sufficient to absorb the shrinkage in assets, he may get paid in full;
otherwise, he will get back only a fraction of his money or none at
all. A demand deposit is thus nothing but a legal claim against
bank assets. That is why it appears on the right-hand side of the
balance sheet as a liability.
The shareholders, as shareholders, also "put money in the bank."
Their claims, however, are of quite a different sort. They are ownership or equity claims, which come after those of depositors and
all other outsiders. These claims are thus not a liability of the
bank in the same sense as are the others. The item "surplus" on the
liability side of the balance sheet represents past earnings which the
Directors have voted to add to the permanent capital of the bank.
"Undivided profits" are past earnings not yet distributed as dividends or added to surplus. A prudent management always builds
up a large surplus for the threefold purpose of protecting the original investment of the stockholders, inspiring public confidence in
the soundness of the bank, and permitting the bank to do a larger

270

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

volume of business. Surplus and undivided profits increase the
equities of the stockholders.
How deposits come into existence. There are two ways in which
deposits come into existence: (a) through the actual deposit by
customers of currency or acceptable checks drawn on other banks;
and (b) through loans made by banks to customers. We shall follow the terminology used by the late Professor F. W. Taussig of Harvard 4 and refer to those originating in the first way as lodged deposits and to the second as created deposits. The law, it should be
noted, makes no such distinction, but the two are different in origin
and have different effects on the behavior of money. A further justification for making the distinction is that it will simplify the explanation of the role of commercial banks as "manufactures of
credit/'
Created deposits. How lodged deposits come into existence is
self-evident. Individuals and firms bring surplus currency to a bank
primarily for the convenience of making payments by check rather
than in physical money. Created deposits, on the other hand, come
into existence as the result of an exchange of credit between a bank
and a customer. An example will illustrate the process.
An example. The XYZ Company, a valuable customer of the
Prudential Bank, wants to buy $65,000 worth of shoes from the
ABC Shoe Manufacturing Corporation of the same city. It expects
to sell the shoes within the next three months for $75,000. It is
prepared to apply on the transaction $15,500 of its lodged deposit
with Prudential. It needs an additional $49,500. Rather than ask
ABC Corporation to accept payments on an installment basis or try
to raise the money by a sale of common stock or by seeking a longterm mortgage-secured loan from an investment bank, it asks the
Prudential Bank for a three-months' loan. The bank agrees to make
a 4 percent, 90-day loan. The XYZ Company signs a 90-day note
for $50,000 and delivers it, together with such collateral as the
bank requires, to the loan officer of the bank. The bank adds the
note to its loans and discounts portfolio and credits the company
with $49,500, i.e., $50,000 less $500 in interest paid in advance.
(This method of lending is called discounting and the charge is
referred to as the discount. A simple computation will show that
the XYZ Company has to pay more than 4 percent on the loan.)
The company immediately mails its check for $65,000 to the ABC
Corporation. The shoes are duly delivered and sold at the antici4
F . W. Taussig, Principles of Economics, Macmillan, New York: 1946, Vol. I,
Chapter 23.

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

271

pated mark-up over the next three months. As the company makes
collections, the checks and cash are deposited with the Prudential
Bank as lodged deposits. When the note matures, the company
pays it by drawing a check for $50,000 against its deposit, turns the
check over to the loan officer of the bank, and gets back its note
and collateral.
The significance of the transaction. It is worth pausing here for
a moment to consider the significance of the transaction. The XYZ
Company, like most business firms, is confronted with the fact that
its revenues flow in fairly steadily throughout the year, whereas its
expenses tend to be bunched. If it is to rely exclusively on its own
resources to finance its current operations, it must have liquid and
nonearning assets against such times as expenses exceed revenues.
This procedure would tie up an unnecessarily large amount of capital in a very unremunerative use. It is much more economical for
the company to look to a bank to tide it over, to provide it with a
part of its "working capital."
But how does the bank do this? In effect, it arranges for a transfer of credits. It says to the XYZ Company, "Give us your note,
your promise to pay, your credit, and we will give you in exchange
a claim on our assets in the form of a created deposit. Within the
limits of this deposit, plus your lodged deposit, we will agree to pay
any of your bills that you ask us to pay." Thus, when the XYZ
Company sends its check for $65,000 to the ABC Shoe Corporation
it is transferring a part of its claim on the Prudential to the Shoe
Corporation. The Shoe Corporation accepts the check because it
has confidence in the credit of the bank. The bank's credit is superior to that of the XYZ Corporation because it is acceptable to
individuals and firms all over the country, indeed all over the world.
Hence it is valuable, and the XYZ Company is willing to pay a
premium (the discount) for the privilege of exchanging its local
and relatively unknown credit for the widely accepted credit of
the bank.
We are now in a position to understand the meaning of the statement made previously that one of the functions of a commercial
bank is to exchange credits.
A balance sheet record of the above transactions. It will be helpful at this point to trace the effects of these transactions on the
balance sheet of the Prudential Bank. We shall run through the
transactions first on the assumption that the ABC Corporation is
also a customer of Prudential and then on the more realistic assumption that it does its business with another bank. To simplify

272

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

the exposition we shall combine certain items on the resource and
liability sides of the balance sheet as shown on page 269. That
balance sheet gives us the original position of the bank.
The situation immediately after the making of the loan and before the XYZ check has been presented for payment is shown immediately below:
BALANCE SHEET NO. 2

Resources

Liabilities

Cash on hand
$ 400,000 Demand liabilities . $ 599,000
Loans and discounts
550,000 Ownership equity ..
445,000
Investments
100,000 Unearned discount .
500
Other liabilities
5,000
Total
1,050,000
Total
1,050,000
Balance Sheet No. 3 shows the situation after Prudential has
honored the check (say 7 days later) and before the XYZ Company
has made any further deposits. (To isolate the effect of this transaction we assume that intervening transactions happened to leave
the bank in the position shown in Balance Sheet No. 2.)
BALANCE SHEET NO. 3

Liabilities

Resources

Demand liabilities . $ 599,500
Ownership equity ..
445,038
Unearned discount .
462
Other liabilities
5,000
Total
1,050,000
1,050,000

Cash on hand
$ 400,000
Loans and discounts
550,000
Investments
100,000
Total

The significant fact revealed by Balance Sheet No. 3 is that this
transaction has had no effect on the total resources and liabilities
of the bank and none whatever on the composition of its resources.
On the liability side there has been an increase in ownership equity
since part of the discount has now been earned. Demand liabilities
remain unchanged, although there have been changes in the bank's
liability to two of its customers. Its liability to the XYZ Company
has been reduced by $65,000, while its liability to the ABC Corporation has been increased by the same amount.

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

273

It is obvious that, if the Prudential Bank were the only bank in
the country and if all individuals and firms transacted all of their
business by checks drawn on Prudential, it could make loans running into the millions of dollars without having to pay out any of its
cash on hand. We shall see presently that the amount of loans a
single bank can make without losing cash is very limited, if all of the
other banks are refusing to make additional loans. But we shall also
see that any bank can safely make loans many times larger than its
cash on hand and on deposit with other banks, if most of the other
banks in the country are also making loans. This will become clear
after we have seen how checks circulate.
Balance Sheet No. 4 shows the situation immediately after the
XYZ Company has repaid its $50,000 loan and has had returned to
it its cancelled note and collateral. (Again, to isolate and identify
the effect of this particular transaction, we make the assumption
that any transactions which may have taken place in the intervening 83 days left the bank in the position shown in Balance Sheet
No. 3 at the moment this transaction occurs.)
BALANCE SHEET NO. 4

Resources

Liabilities

Cash on hand
$ 400,000 Demand liabilities . !$ 549,500
Loans and discounts
500,000 Ownership equity . . 445,500
100,000 Unearned discount .
Investments
Other liabilities . . . .
5,000
Total
1,000,000
Total
1,000,000
This transaction has affected both sides of the balance sheet.
Loans and discounts on the resource side and demand liabilities on
the liability side are both reduced by $50,000. There has been a
reduction of one item, unearned discount, and a corresponding increase of another, ownership equity, but both are on the same side
of the balance sheet. The total is thus not affected. The point to
note about this transaction is that it involves a destruction of the
credit created at the time the loan was made. A commercial bank
loan ordinarily involves credit creation. This credit circulates as
part of the money supply until the loan is repaid. It then disappears
from the monetary circuit. Private commercial banking is thus
capable of increasing and decreasing the nation's money supply.

274

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

This explains why borrowing from the commercial banks is inflationary and repaying commercial bank loans is deflationary.
We shall now trace these same transactions on the assumption
that the ABC Corporation keeps its accounts with another bank,
that it deposits the XYZ Company check with this bank, and that
this bank presents it to the Prudential for payment. In passing it
should be noted that, when the ABC Corporation deposits the
check, the deposit liability of its bank is increased by $65,000. This
transaction involves an increase in a lodged deposit. But our concern here is with the balance sheet of the Prudential.
The situation immediately after the making of the loan and before the check has been presented for payment is exactly the same
as before. It is reflected in Balance Sheet No. 2. After the check
has been honored, Prudential's position is very different from what
it was in Position No. 3. Resources and liabilities are both down by
$65,000 as the result of a loss of cash on hand and an equal decline
in the bank's demand liabilities. Resources and liabilities now balance out at $985,000 instead of at $1,050,000. When the note is repaid, resources and liabilities again balance out, but at $935,000
as a result of the $50,000 reduction in the item "loans and discounts" and a corresponding reduction in the item "demand liabilities."
After this little exercise in double-entry bookkeeping, we are
ready to return to the main problem at hand, which is to show how
bank credit circulates through the use of checks and bank notes and
what forces set limits to the amount of credit commercial banks
can create.
How bank deposits circulate. Bank deposits circulate by check
or by bank note. When the XYZ Company sent its check to the
ABC Corporation, it transferred to that company a portion of its
deposit with the Prudential. When the ABC Corporation's bank
collects the check, there is a movement of cash between the two
banks (unless there should happen to be an equal and opposite
movement of claims as a result of other transactions) and a change
in the demand deposit liabilities of the two banks—a decrease in
the case of Prudential and an increase in the case of the other bank.
If the two banks were branches of a single bank, the effect on the
consolidated balance sheet of the three transactions which we have
been studying would be exactly the same as though both companies
kept their accounts with Prudential.
Bank check money. We have referred to checks a number of

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

275

times in the preceding discussion. It is now time to state just what
a check is.
A check is a peremptory and very abbreviated letter addressed by
a depositor to his bank instructing the bank to pay to a designated
party a specified sum of money. The person making out the check
is the drawer; the person in whose favor the check is drawn is the
drawee. When the drawee presents a check to the bank on which
it is drawn, or deposits it with his own bank for collection, he must
endorse his name on the back exactly as it appears on the face of
the check. When the check is "honored," or paid, the account of the
drawer is, as we have seen, reduced by the amount of the check,
and the account of the drawee is increased by the same amount.
A customer who wants cash for across-the-counter transactions
may make out a check to self or to cash and withdraw currency
from the bank. Similarly the drawee may ask for cash. Assuming
that the drawer and the drawee are both customers of the same
bank, such a transaction would result in the reduction of the drawer's deposit and a corresponding reduction of the bank's asset, currency on hand.
Checks are thus written orders addressed to a debtor, in this case
a bank, instructing it to pay a debt due by a customer to a third
party. In the United States literally millions of transactions are
settled in this fashion, leaving their traces on the books of banks
and business firms in the form of credits and debits. This is what
one author meant when he characterized a commercial bank "as in
reality nothing but a record-keeping office, as a sort of an accounting department for the economic system as a whole." 5
The clearing of checks. During the course of a business day a
bank will receive hundreds of checks drawn in favor of its customers and deposited by them; also, hundreds of checks drawn by its
customers in favor of third parties will be presented for payment.
If, on a particular day, all of the checks drawn on a bank involved
customers of the bank, and if none of the customers wanted currency, it is quite possible that hundreds of thousands of dollars of
business will have been transacted without any change in the bank's
"currency on hand." Bank clerks will have made hundreds of
changes on the ledger sheets set up for its individual customers, but
the pluses (credits) and the minuses (debits) will exactly cancel
so that the liability side of the bank's balance sheet, like the resource side, will show no change.
5
F. R. Ormes, Elementary Construction and Interpretation of Financial Statements,
pp. 82-3 (Cxawf ordsville, Indiana: 1941. Privately printed).

276

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

A day's business is not likely to end up so neatly. On balance, our
bank will end the day with net claims against other banks or with
a balance due other banks.
A local clearing house. If there are a number of banks in a community, they will form a local clearing house. The clearing house
may be a physical locale especially set up and supported by the
local banks, or it may simply be an agreed meeting place, an office
in one of the banks, with each bank in turn providing the place for
a week or a month. At the end of each business day, representatives
of the banks meet at the clearing house. Each one brings with him
the checks drawn on the other banks which it has undertaken to
collect for its customers. The total of the checks drawn on other
banks and deposited by its customers constitute Prudential's claim
against the clearing house, while the total of the checks drawn by
Prudential's customers and deposited with the other local banks for
collection constitute the clearing house's claim against Prudential.
The net balance for or against Prudential is settled by turning over
to or receiving from the clearing house the amount of the balance
in legal tender money. A very substantial volume of local business
can be transacted with little or no movement of currency from one
bank to another.
Regional and national clearing house operations. But the cus-

tomers of the Prudential have dealings with customers scattered
all over the country. The bank must be prepared to handle these.
To this end it opens deposits with large banks in strategic centers
and arranges that these correspondent banks pay checks drawn
against it, and collect and deposit to its credit all the checks received by its customers and drawn on banks that are members of
the correspondents' clearing houses. At the end of each day checks
on outside banks are sorted according to clearing house districts
and sent by registered mail to the appropriate correspondents to be
collected. Each day the bank receives from its correspondents
packets of cancelled checks which the correspondents had paid. In
brief, a correspondent treats the business of the Prudential as part
of its own business and collects and settles through its own local
clearing house, crediting Prudential's account with collections and
debiting it with payments. This is why the balance sheet given on
page 269 shows Prudential's "deposits with other banks" as a multiple of its currency on hand.
Depending on the nature of the businesses in Middletown,
Prudential may find that on balance its New York correspondent
has to pay out more than it collects, while its Chicago and its San

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

277

Francisco correspondents collect more than they have to pay out.
In that event, Prudential will, from time to time, draw checks on its
Chicago and San Francisco correspondents ordering them to pay
specified amounts to the New York correspondent.
The details regarding the clearing of checks do not concern us.
It suffices to note that in a modern industrial society a system of
inter-related clearing houses permit a bank in a small community
to make collections and payments for its customers wherever the
parties involved may be located. In the United States, most checks
are cleared through the Federal Reserve System, which will be
described later.
It was pointed out previously that the deposits of customers appear on the balance sheet of the bank as liabilities. This is true
whether the customer is a private individual, a business firm, or
another bank. But from the point of view of a bank that opens up
an account with a correspondent, the deposit appears on its balance
sheet as a "resource" under the heading "currency on deposit with
other banks."
Bank notes. Despite the enormous importance of check book
money in the American economy today, the bulk of petty transactions are still settled by physical "legal tender money," subsidiary
coins, silver certificates, and bank notes. At the present time only
our Federal Reserve Banks can issue bank notes, but this was not
always so. Throughout most of our history, our private commercial
banks provided us with this form of currency. Here we shall discuss
bank notes as though they were still provided by the commercial
banks. A brief account of this note system is given later.
Bank notes provide a second method of circulating bank credit.
A bank note is nothing more than a claim on a bank's assets. It is
a promise of the bank to pay the holder of the note on demand in
legal tender money the amount stated on the face of the note. Since
paper, or folding money, is much more convenient to carry around
than metallic currency, most people will prefer to have most of the
money they need for "cash" transactions in the form of bank notes
rather than hard money, as long as they have complete confidence
that the issuing banks will give them legal tender money, should
they want it. Bank notes thus tend to stay in circulation much
longer than checks. Checks tend to "come home to roost" after
completing the transactions for which they were intended. Bank
notes, on the other hand, may stay out for years, traveling from
pocket to pocket and visiting every state in the Union, before coming home, shabby and worn out. This behavior of the bank note

278

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

makes of it a less pressing but, in a sense, a more solemn obligation
than a check. No one has to accept a check if he doubts the solvency of the drawer of the check or of the bank on which it is
drawn; and if a check "bounces,' if the bank refuses to honor it, the
drawee still has recourse against the drawer. No one has to accept
a bank note either; it is not legal tender. But, once it is accepted,
it is difficult for the acceptor to trace it back to the person who gave
it to him and recover in the event that the note proves worthless.
Hence governments have usually and very properly surrounded the
right of bank note issue with special safeguards.
The point to note here is that bank notes, like checks, provide a
means for creating and circulating bank credit.
Assuming as we do here that all bank notes are provided by the
commercial banks, what will determine the amount outstanding?
It will be the habits of the people and the technical requirements
of trade. If the banks put more notes in circulation than are needed
for cash transactions, the excess returns to the banks in the form of
lodged deposits. Each bank then ships the notes issued by other
banks back to those banks and demands legal tender money in exchange.
The credit limit: The reserve ratio. At the outset of this description of the operation of commercial banks it was stated that they
both exchange credits and create credits. We now want to know
what forces determine the limits of credit creation by a single
bank and by the commercial banks taken as a whole.
Credit creation by a single hank. The power of a single bank to
create credit is very limited indeed. If the Prudential Bank should
make generous loans to customers at a time when all other banks
were contracting loans or merely making new loans as old ones
matured, its currency holdings would be very quickly depleted.
It would soon find itself unable to meet the demands for cash coming from customers who needed pocket money for their daily transactions.
Credit creation by commercial banks taken as a whole. It does
not follow from the fact that a single bank cannot create credit
that commercial banks, taken as a whole, cannot do so. A wellestablished and soundly run commercial bank will be continuously
receiving checks from customers for collection and deposit to their
accounts, checks drawn on other banks, and will continuously be
presented through the clearing house mechanism with demands for
cash. If all of the commercial banks of a country were members
of a single national clearing house, and if the country had no trad-

BANKING OPERATIONS AND THE PRICE LEVEL

279

ing relations with the outside world, then it would be true that the
vast number of daily check transactions, involving hundreds of millions of dollars, would have little if any effect on the cash reserves
of the banks, taken as a whole. Banks that were extending credit
more generously than most of the others would find their reserve
ratios falling. Inability to pay in cash any notes that might be presented or any checks drawn on their customers would force them
to close their doors. Since the customers of a bank are always in
need of a certain amount of "pocketbook money," this threat would
force them to curtail credit so as to build up their reserves. The
managers of the more conservative banks, on the other hand, would
be under pressure from their stockholders to go out and look for
likely borrowers, since cash on hand earns no interest and cash on
deposit with other banks earns little or none. Thus, as long as bank
managements were confident that they had ample legal tender
money on hand to meet the demand for "pocketbook money," the
banks, taken as a whole, could safely create deposits in favor of
customers without risking their solvency; moreover, since the earnings of the banks vary inversely with the size of their reserve ratios,
profit considerations would tend to induce all banks to approach
as closely as possible some minimum reserve ratio that experience
had indicated to be sate. Just how low the reserve ratio could fall
without threatening the solvency of the banking system cannot be
stated in advance. The more conservative the banks, and the fewer
bad loans they made, the lower the ratio could fall. In Great Britain, where there has never been any legal minimum reserve ratio
requirement, 10 percent was long regarded as the danger point.
We are now ready to study our monetary models.

Questions:
1. Define "investment banking"; indicate its principal functions in a
private enterprise economy. Cite examples. Would you include life
insurance companies?
2. What are the essential differences between investment banking and
commercial banking?
3. On May 1st the management of the Prudential Bank of Middletown
concludes that the bank's resources are overvalued by at least $50,000.
It decides to "write down" the item "loans and discounts" by this
amount. (See the balance sheet on page 269 of the text.) The balance sheet of May 1st reflects this change. It is the only one on the
resource side.

280

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

(a) What change will have to be made on the liability side of the
balance sheet to restore the equality of assets and liabilities?
(b) Explain the meaning of the terms "the balance sheet" and
"ownership equities/' and explain why it is the bank's resources
(assets) and liabilities must always and of necessity be equal.
4. A has $1000 "in the Prudential Bank" in the form of an investment
in its common stock. B has an equal amount "in the bank" as the
result of a deposit of legal tender money.
(a) Is there any difference in law in the claims of A and B on the
bank?
(b) Show how these two transactions get recorded on the bank's
balance sheet.
5. "There is no real difference between 'lodged' and 'created' deposits.
The distinction is entirely conceptual in nature. Its purpose is to
help make clear the nature and functions of commercial banking."
(a) Explain the difference in the way in which the two originate.
(b) Can a created deposit become a lodged deposit? If so how?
(c) Does the transformation of a created deposit into a lodged deposit involve what is referred to in the text as its "destruction"? If
not, how does a "created deposit" ever get "destroyed"?
6. Explain what limits the ability of the banking system to create deposits and why this limit does not apply to any one bank which is
pursuing a lending policy which runs counter to that of the majority
of the banks.
7. Identify and explain in some detail the three functions which commercial banks render in a private enterprise economy in which fractional reserve banking is legal. Would your answer be the same if
each bank were required to keep $1 of legal tender money as reserve
against $1 in demand deposits?
8. Identify the following:
bank checks—bank notes—time deposits—demand deposits—the reserves of a bank—the reserve ratio—a clearing house—pocketbook
money.

23
Monetary Management
in an Isolated State

A HE purpose of this chapter is to
determine whether, in fact, a government can determine the longrun behavior of the price level. With a view to simplifying the
problem the following general assumptions will be made:
(a) that public opinion definitely favors one of the three pricelevel policies mentioned in Chapter 21, viz.: a slowly rising or a
slowly falling price level or a price level which keeps the value
(purchasing power) of the money constant over time;
(b) that the price level policy favored by the public will not
prevent the economy from operating continuously at the full employment level. In other words, we assume here that private firms
are able to meet the changing demands of consumers and the changing requirements of growth and technological progress and to provide satisfactory employment for all of the nation's resources
owners.
In Chapters 27-29 we shall examine the problem of booms and
depressions and, in that connection, re-examine the problem of price
level policy on the assumption that public opinion regards the
maintenance of full employment as more important than the successful carrying out of any one of the three price level policies
here under consideration. The entire problem is so complex that
there is an advantage in starting out with the assumption that
adjustments will be made by firms and by resource owners with
such speed that there will be no involuntary unemployment.
The method of procedure. We shall proceed with the use of a
series of hypothetical models. Here it suffices to list the models so
that the reader will be able to see the nature of the argument. The
281

282

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

first two models will involve an isolated state with a completely independent banking system. The third and fourth will maintain the
assumption of isolation, but will introduce a quasi-public Central
Bank that will progressively substitute government debt for gold as
the basis for the country's money supply. In the fifth and last
model the assumption of isolation will be dropped and the workability of the "managed currency" proposal, as developed in the
fourth model, will be reviewed in the light of conditions prevailing
in the real world of nationalistic governments. The case for and
against the desirability of reestablishing an international gold standard will be developed in connection with this last model.
BANKING UNDER FIRST MODEL
The assumptions of the model. In this model we assume an isolated state with a growing population, a progressive technology,
and a democratic government dedicated to the maintenance of effective competition. The economy operates continuously at reasonably full employment. The country possesses an elaborate system
of private and completely independent commercial banks, which
are members of regional clearing associations and a national clearing association. Each bank is required by law to keep a 100 percent
reserve of gold dollars or gold certificates to meet its demand liabilities. These will consist entirely of the checking accounts of their
customers. The banks are not prohibited from issuing bank notes,
but, for reasons to be explained in a moment, they will not do so,
because there is no profit in issuing notes. Hence the task of providing the public with "pocketbook money" will devolve entirely
on the State. It will issue gold certificates in convenient denominations backed 100 percent by gold. The national money is called
the dollar and is defined as consisting of 24 grains of fine gold.
There is no "fiat" money, i.e., money whose acceptability depends
upon confidence in the State, other than the subsidiary coins (pennies, 5, 10, 25, and 50 cent pieces) necessary for small transactions.
All the gold mines in the country are privately owned as is the entire stock of gold used for monetary and industrial uses.
We shall call this model the 100 percent gold reserve model.
What functions do the commercial banks serve in this model?
Their two principal functions are to keep the records for the economy and to exchange their credits for those of their customers.
Since all of their deposits are lodged deposits backed dollar for dollar by gold and gold certificates in their vaults, they cannot create
credit. What the customers turn over to the banks for the conven-

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

283

ience of being able to make payments by check is real wealth—gold
and gold certificates.
Under this model the revenues of the banks are derived exclusively from their charges for honoring the checks of their customers
and for collecting the checks drawn in favor of their customers.
Since these are very convenient services, commercial banking can
levy service charges. This would be their principal source of revenue. Undoubtedly, the use of checks would be less widespread
than it is in countries with fractional reserve banking, and hence
the number of banks would be less, but the resources devoted to
this form of banking would be as well rewarded as in alternative
activities.
Prices under First Model. In an economy operating under the
assumptions of this model, the T in the equation MV = PT would
increase at a steady rate.1 This increase in T would cause a steady
fall in the general level of prices ?, unless the increase in the money
supply M or in its circulation V kept pace with the increase in the
volume of goods and services currently being exchanged for money.
What are the prospects of this happening?
The behavior of M and V. The M in the equation would be relatively stable. It would consist of the gold in the Treasury and the
gold coins in the banks and in the hands of private persons and
nonbanking firms. The gold certificates and the subsidiary coins
cannot be counted as part of the supply since a definite amount of
gold would be immobilized in the Treasury, earmarked for their
redemption. Nor could checks-in-action constitute any addition to
the money supply. Backed as they would be 100 percent by gold
in bank vaults, they would merely represent a safe and convenient
method of transferring legal title to that gold. The checks merely
increase the efficiency with which the gold supply performs its
function as a medium of exchange.
The value of V would also tend to be fairly stable over a period
of time because it would depend on the habits and customs of the
country. In particular the velocity of circulation would not be affected by the waves of doubt regarding the solvency of the banks
that sometimes sweep through a country operating with a frac1

In the United States, for example, despite intermittent periods of fairly serious
unemployment, output of physical goods and services increased on the average at
over 2 percent a year per person over a period of more than 100 years, and Dr.
Harold G. Moulton of the Brookings Institution has recently estimated that there are
no technical difficulties in the way of our turning out eight times as much per capita
in the next hundred years, with a population twice as great as that of 1950. Controlling Factors in Economic Development, Brookings Institution, Washington: 1949.

284

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

tional reserve banking system. In this model, banks could only
fail, in the sense of being unable to pay off depositors 100 cents on
the dollar, as a result of downright dishonesty. Any substantial increase in MV, therefore, would be due primarily to an increase in
the flow of new gold to the Treasury. The new gold could come
from the melting down of jewelry or from newly mined gold. But
since the Treasury would have been accumulating gold for generations past, the new gold added to the supply in any one year could
not have any very large effect on M. And with every passing decade the price-lifting effect of any quantity of new gold would become less and less. Thus, when the total supply of monetary gold
in the system was 100,000,000 grains of fine gold, the addition of
one million grains would represent a one percent increase in M.
If, at a later time, the total supply had risen to one billion grains,
an equal addition of new gold would represent a one-tenth of one
percent increase in the money supply.
The economics of gold mining. The preceding analysis points
to a slowly declining price level. If this trend proved to be a
serious obstacle to business expansion, public opinion would
strongly favor measures to check the fall in prices.2
To some extent, the economics of gold mining tend to check price
declines. In periods of falling prices the profit margin in gold mining widens. This is due to the fact that the expenses of production
(in terms of wages, cost of machinery, equipment, and supplies)
tend to fall with the general fall in prices, whereas the selling price
of the product, gold, remains unchanged, being fixed by the coinage law. Thus the fall in the price level would lead to more intensive prospecting for new gold deposits and the more rapid
exploitation of the known deposits. If our isolated society is abundantly supplied with gold mines, it may be possible to increase the
flow of gold to the Treasury at an accelerating rate and thus counteract to some slight degree the downward effect on prices of the
secular increase in T. Most societies have preferred to avoid this
costly diversion of productive resources into the gold mining industry by freeing their banks from the requirement that they back
their deposits dollar for dollar with gold.
The savings-investment relationship. Before leaving this 100 percent gold reserve model it is important that we note the relationship
between saving, investing, and capital formation. The banks are
the custodians of the surplus funds of their customers; in a sense,
they are financial warehouses undertaking to honor claims on the
2

See p. 264 for discussion of effects of deflation on business activity.

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

285

basis of written orders, i.e., checks. A customer cannot borrow from
his bank for the good reason that the bank has nothing to lend. If
he wishes to borrow, he has to find someone with surplus funds to
lend. Since most people are not well equipped to make direct
loans, we can be sure that specialized investment houses will develop that will accept and invest the savings of small savers. In
this model no one can borrow unless someone, somewhere in the
closed economy, is prepared to lend. This relationship will not be
true in the fractional reserve banking models to which we now
turn.
BANKING UNDER SECOND MODEL
The assumptions of the model. The assumptions of this model
differ from those of the first in one respect only. The banks are
authorized to issue notes and create deposits without any limits
whatsoever.
The creation of deposits. Under this model the banks are in a
position to lend even when there is no corresponding desire to
save. This can be done because most of the checks drawn on a
bank by customers and presented for payment by noncustomers are
offset by checks drawn on other banks and presented for collection
and deposit by customers.
This model may very properly be called a fractional gold reserve
free banking model. The way such a model operates was described
in the preceding chapter. Only there we referred to the reserves as
legal tender. Here it is specified that gold is the only legal tender
currency.
Bank notes in Second Model. The banks will supply all of the
"pocketbook money," except the fractional metallic currency,
through the issue of their own bank notes. This now becomes a
profitable activity since the notes represent claims on their credit,
in the same fashion as do demand deposits, and all they have to
keep on hand in gold and gold certificates is whatever sum experience leads them to believe will be enough to meet the demands of
customers and note holders for gold. The role of the government
in this model is limited to (a) providing the subsidiary coins, (b)
buying and selling gold at the fixed prices set by the coinage law,
(c) storing gold and issuing gold certificates according as the public prefers certificates to gold, and (d) releasing gold and redeeming certificates whenever the public prefers gold to gold certificates.
The equation of exchange once more. With the introduction of
bank credit the price level is no longer tied so directly to the supply

286

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

of gold. Additional purchasing power can be added in the form of
bank credit. The equation of exchange must be modified to take
this into account. Under this second model, the equation becomes
MV + M'V = PT in which M' stands for the volume of outstanding bank credit and V the velocity of its circulation.
Velocity of circulation cannot be measured with complete accuracy.
We have no record of the frequency with which pocketbook money
changes hands. Bank deposits, however, circulate by means of checks.
Every check leaves its trail on the books of the banks in the form of a
"debit" against the account of the drawer of the check. Since so much of
the business of the United States is done by check we shall not be wide
of the mark if we accept the velocity of circulation of deposits as the
measure of the velocity of the entire money supply. The velocity of circulation of deposits is obtained by dividing the total debits for a year by
the average amount of demand deposits of all the banks for the year. Allowance has to be made for the fact that the deposits of the New York
banks turn over more rapidly than those of banks in other centers. In
mid-1950 money was turning over about 12.5 times a year. Back in 1929
the turn-over was closer to 30. Between 1929 and 1950 there has been a
tremendous increase in the money supply. The upward effect upon the
price level would have been much greater had the velocity of circulation
of money not declined steadily between the two periods. Loss of confidence in our money would speed up its circulation and lead to an inflationary rise in prices. All proposals for a managed currency system run
up against this problem of controlling the rate of turn-over of the money
supply. Habits of a people, and the technical characteristics of the methods of producing and selling goods, tend to make for a fairly steady rate
of turn-over, but the intangible element of confidence can cause sudden
and violent changes which are not easily subject to government control
The limits of expansion under Second Model. Theoretically, output could expand almost indefinitely under this model without the
necessity of any fall in the general level of prices. If the banks
extended credit exclusively for financing new business, M'V would
increase in step with the volume of transactions T, and the price
level P would remain constant. M/M' would slowly fall, since the
supply of new gold would not be increasing as fast as the volume
of work to be done.
Actually private banks have always made loans for speculative
purposes as well as for financing the production and sale of currently produced goods. Such loans, which enable people to buy
economic goods already in existence, real estate, outstanding issues
of stocks and bonds, etc., inject new purchasing power into the economic system. If the economy is operating at the full employment

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

287

level when this happens, the effect is to raise prices. The rise occurs
first in the real estate and stock markets, but some of the purchasing
power spills over into the consumer goods markets, causing prices
to rise there.
The same results follow when banks finance installment buying.
Consumers pledge future incomes to buy now. This tends to drive
up prices. Later, when the loans have to be repaid, the excess
purchasing power is withdrawn from circulation; this tends to depress prices. The financing of speculation and consumer buying is,
in part, responsible for the ups and downs of the general price level,
and these in turn complicate the task of keeping a private enterprise
economy operating smoothly.
The assumptions of the model do not permit of any exact statement as to the limit of expansion of bank credit. In the preceding
chapter it was pointed out that a reserve ratio of 10 percent was
long regarded in Great Britain as the level below which a bank's
reserves should not be allowed to fall for any length of time. But
this rule-of-thumb rule took account of the fact that England was
the banking center of the world and that its gold reserves were
required to meet foreign as well as domestic demands for gold. It
is safe to say, therefore, that the safe minimum reserve in this model
would be well below 10 percent. It would depend entirely upon
the needs of firms and of individuals for "pocketbook money."
The safeguard against inflation. The profits of a commercial bank
depend upon the volume of its lending, the rate of discount charged
on its loans, and the proportion of the loans that turn bad. The
volume of a bank's lending relative to the equity capital supplied
by the owners depends on the bank's reserve ratio. The lower the
ratio, the larger the volume of loans it is making. Profit-seeking
banks thus are under a standing temptation to build higher and
higher the superstructure of credit on their gold holdings. What
are the forces present in this situation to protect the public from
excessive expansion of bank credit?
The answer to this question requires that we define "excessive."
The expansion of bank credit would be excessive if it exceeded the
expanding needs of trade. In that event it would lead to a general
rise of prices, i.e., to inflation .
The next question is this: Would inflation bring into operation an
automatic corrective? The answer is, "yes." As prices rose, firms
and individuals would find it necessary to hold more "pocketbook
money." Hence checks would be presented to the banks for notes,
and the banks would now be forced to curtail their loans with a

288

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

view to building their reserve ratios up to safe levels. This curtailment of credit would eventually stop the rise in the general price
level. The inflation would be brought to a halt.
BANKING UNDER THIRD MODEL:
THE CENTRAL BANK MODEL
The assumptions of the model. This model differs from the second in two respects: (a) There is a Central Bank in which all
private banks must keep their legal reserves. These must not fall
below 20 percent of their demand deposits. (b) The Central Bank
has the exclusive power to issue bank notes. These notes are legal
tender. The private banks are required, as a condition of doing
business, to subscribe 6 percent of their capital and surplus to the
common stock of the Central Bank. To meet across-the-counter demands for cash from customers, member banks have to keep an
additional amount of legal tender money in their vaults ("till
money"). This "till money" forms no part of their legal reserves. It
is merely the most liquid of their secondary reserves. The Central
Bank does business only with the member banks and with the government. Its liabilities consist of its capital and surplus (the ownership equity of the member banks), its outstanding notes, and the
deposits of the member banks and of the government. Against
these deposits it is required by law to keep a minimum reserve of
25 percent.
The Central Bank's earnings come from the rediscounting of the
commercial paper of member banks and from the purchase in the
open market of outstanding issues of the government's bonds. (For
reasons that will be explained later, it may not buy new issues.)
There is no limit upon the amount of its earnings, but it is prohibited from paying dividends in excess of 6 percent on its paid-in
capital stock.
The operations of the Central Bank. The Bank is privately

owned, but its purposes are public. It does not seek to make money
for its owners, but rather "to regulate the supply, availability and
cost of money, with a view to maintaining a high level of employment, stable values (meaning a stable price level), and a rising
standard of living." 3 To carry out this mandate the Bank is authorized by its Charter (a) to alter at its discretion its rediscount rate;
(b) to liberalize or tighten up on the character of the bank paper
3
Quoted from the statement of purposes in the Federal Reserve Act. Incidentally
the term level of living would have been more appropriate here than standard of
living. See p. 176 for the distinction between the two terms.

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

289

it will accept for rediscount; (c) to engage in "open market operations"; and (d) to impose changes in member bank reserve requirements.
The rediscount rate. A bank that has allowed its reserve to get
down close to the legal minimum is in a precarious position. Even
a small withdrawal of cash can drive its reserve ratio below the
legal minimum. To get into a liquid position, it must convert some
of its loans and discounts or its investments into cash and deposit
the cash with the Central Bank. One method of doing this is to
endorse and send to the Central Bank some of the notes of customers, together with the supporting collateral. The Bank lends an
amount equal to the face value of the paper, less its interest charge,
or rediscount rate. The amount of the loan is credited to the member bank's account with the Central Bank. The transaction produces two changes, both on the left or resource side of the member
bank's balance sheet. The "loans and discounts" item goes down,
and the "cash on deposit with the Central Bank" item goes up by
the same amount. The member bank is now in possession of excess
reserves, since each dollar of the new deposit with the Central Bank
will support $5 of additional demand deposits.
The profitability of rediscounting paper obviously depends upon
the relationship of member bank discount rates to the rate charged
by the Central Bank. A high rediscount rate discourages "going to
the Bank"; a low rate encourages it. The decision to go or not to
go, however, rests with the individual bank. The Central Bank can
merely make resort to Central Bank credit more or less profitable.
That is why the rediscount rate is classified as an indirect power.
Acceptable rediscount paper. The effect of the power to liberalize or to tighten up on the character of acceptable rediscount paper
can be seen quickly. This power limits the proportion of the individual banks' loans to customers that can be passed on to the
Central Bank. The Bank's refusal to accept certain types of paper
discourages but does not prohibit member banks from making the
kind of loans that are declared ineligible for rediscount. The final
decision still rests with them.
The ability of member banks to replenish their legal reserves by
rediscounting commercial paper permits them to extend credit
more freely than would otherwise be the case. In effect, member
banks can become, to a certain extent, financial middlemen, screening the innumerable requests for bank loans on the basis of their
intimate knowledge of local conditions, and passing them on to the
Central Bank. As long as the Central Bank's rediscount rate is less

290

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

than the discount rates of member banks, the latter stand to make
money by the process. They remain liable to the Central Bank,
however, in the event of defaults by the borrowers.
Open market operations. The term "open market operations" refers primarily to the purchase and sale of fixed interest-bearing
securities in the open market by the Central Bank. We shall assume
that the only securities dealt in are the debt obligations of the State.
Central Bank sales reduce member bank reserves; Central Bank
purchases replenish them. This is true, regardless of whether the
Central Bank deals directly with the member banks or with customers of the member banks.
Sales are deflationary. If member banks buy the bonds thrown
on the market by the Central Bank, they pay by checks on their
account with the Central Bank. Their balance sheets then show an
increase in the resource item, "investments," and a corresponding
reduction of the resource item, cash with Central Bank. The totals
on the two sides of their balance sheets are unaffected, but their
ability to lend has been reduced.
The result is only slightly different if bank customers buy the
securities. They pay by drawing checks on their banks in favor of
the Central Bank. The Central Bank delivers the securities and
collects by debiting the accounts of the banks against which the
checks are drawn. The absolute reserves of the member banks are
reduced in exactly the same way and to the same extent as though
they had made the purchases for their own accounts. But in this
case the offsetting entry on their balance sheets appears on the right
or liability side in the form of a reduction of demand deposits.
Member bank reserve ratios are not reduced quite as much by customer purchases as by direct purchases. Thus Central Bank sales
are deflationary.
Purchases are inflationary. Purchases by the Central Bank have
exactly the opposite effect. They build up member banks' reserves,
regardless of whether the purchases are made from the banks or
from their customers. If a bank sells securities from its investment
portfolio, the offsetting entries appear on the resource side of its
balance sheet in the form of a decrease in investments and an equal
increase in legal reserves. If a customer sells, he deposits the
Central Bank's check with his bank and the latter sends it back to
the Central Bank for collection. The member bank balance sheet
shows an increase in its legal reserve, on the resource side, and a
corresponding increase in its deposit liability on the liability side.

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

291

Member bank reserve ratios are not increased quite as much by
customer sales as by direct sales.
Open market operations and the interest rate. The buying and
selling of government bonds by the Central Bank affects the market
rate of interest. Large purchases drive up the price of government
bonds. This reduces the effective rate of interest earned by holders
of these securities. Conversely large sales drive the price down and
increase the effective rate of interest.
Thus open market operations are intended to do two things: increase or decrease the lending power of the banks, and reduce or
increase the basic interest rate on the most liquid and riskless type
of investment available in the money market. In a competitive and
intercommunicating capital market the interest rates for all other
types of investment, involving greater degrees of risk, tend to move
in response to changes in this basic rate. It follows that open
market operations constitute a very powerful device for controlling
the supply, availability, and cost of money, and thus for influencing the behavior of the economy as a whole.
Changes in member bank reserve requirement. An increase in the
minimum reserve requirement reduces the ability of member banks
to extend credit; a decrease in the requirement increases it. This
power must be used with great discretion as its effects are immediate. A sharp increase imposed at a time when member bank
reserves were close to the current legal minimum could render
practically every member bank insolvent. An increase can thus stop
bank lending; a decrease, however, cannot compel the banks to
lend. It merely puts them in a position where they can lend, if
profitable opportunities present themselves.
The limit of expansion. What is the limit of expansion under this
model? By what process is it reached?
(a) The limit under existing rules. The limit of expansion is
reached when the reserve ratio of the Central Bank has fallen to
the 25 percent level and the reserve ratios of the member banks are
at the 20 percent level. When this point is reached each dollar of
gold in the vaults of the Central Bank will be supporting a superstructure of bank credit, or bank money, of approximately $20.
The Central Bank can extend $4 of credit to member banks in the form
of created deposits for each dollar in its vault. These created deposits
represent the legal reserves of the member banks. They, in turn, can
lend $5 to their customers against each dollar of their reserves with the
Central Bank.

292

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

Given our assumptions, this is the theoretical limit. The actual
limit would be somewhat lower. Member banks would have to
have some till money to meet customer demands for cash. Nor can
the Central Bank let its reserve fall to the 25 percent level without
losing its control of the banking system. It is nonetheless true that
the national economy could expand for an extended period of time
within the so-called strait-jacket of the gold standard without the
necessity of a fall in the general price level.
It may be worthwhile noting how the new gold would enter into
the monetary circulation. A gold mining company brings gold to
the Treasury. It is assayed and found to contain a definite number
of grains of fine gold, 240,000, for example. At the "mint" price it
is worth $10,000. The Treasury pays for the gold with a check
drawn on its account with the Central Bank, and it replenishes the
account by depositing with the Bank $10,000 in gold coins or gold
certificates. The mining company deposits the Treasury check with
its bank which forwards it for collection to the Central Bank. The
Central Bank debits the Treasury account and credits the member
bank's account. The member bank now has $10,000 in additional
legal reserves and $10,000 in additional demand deposits. If the
legal reserve is 20 percent, $2,000 of this reserve is needed to cover
the mining company deposit; $8,000 is excess reserves. The bank is
in a position to create additional deposits to the extent of $40,000.
Assuming that it does so, the borrowers will draw checks against
these deposits and most of the checks will be deposited in other
banks. These banks will send them to the Central Bank for collection after which they will appear on the balance sheets as additions to Cash with Central Bank, and they in turn will be in a
position to extend additional credits to customers. Thus, over a
period of time, the new gold becomes part of the legal reserves of
all the banks and permits a general expansion of bank credit of 20
times $10,000 or $200,000 less whatever deductions must be made
on account of the need for additional till money.
Let us assume, however, that our isolated economy has finally
grown to such a size that a further expansion of production and
exchange necessitates a fall in the general level of prices. Could
this be avoided? The answer is, "yes/' A government that is determined to maintain the general level of prices can further relax the
relationship between gold and the money supply or, as a last resort,
break the tie entirely. Our next model will illustrate the latter possibility. Before taking that last step, however, the government
could (a) devalue, i.e., reduce the gold content of a dollar; (b)

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

293

reduce the minimum legal gold reserve requirement for the member
banks and the Central Bank; and (c) call in all the gold coin in
circulation.

Extending the limit through devaluation. The government could
declare that, as of a certain date, the gold content of the dollar
would be reduced from 24 to, say, 16 grains of fine gold. This is
known as devaluation. If at the time of devaluation there were 24
billion grains of fine gold in the vault of the Central Bank, the gold
base would be one billion dollars. Immediately after devaluation,
the gold base rises to 1.5 billion dollars, an increase of $500 million.
The government appropriates this half billion dollars. It appears
in the form of a write-up of its deposit with the Central Bank. It
may use this new money to reduce the national debt or to meet
current expenditures. In either case the checks drawn by the Treasury transfer the deposit to the member banks. It appears on their
balance sheets as excess reserves. As a result of devaluation the
member banks and the Central Bank now have excess reserves and
are in a position to create close to $10 billions of additional checkbook money ($20 X $500,000,000).
Extending the limit through lowering minimum reserve requirements. A reduction of the legal minimum reserve requirements provides a second avenue of escape from a deflationary pressure on the
price level. Thus, if the minimum reserve of the Central Bank were
cut from 25 percent to 20 percent and that of the member banks
from 20 percent to 10 percent, the leverage power of a dollar of
new gold would be raised from 20 to 50 (5 X 10).
These two measures make the link between gold and the money
supply very tenuous indeed.
Extending the limit through calling in gold coins. The third device for relieving the pressure on prices would be to make it illegal
for the banks or private parties to hold gold. This would force the
gold into the Central Bank where it would appear in the form of
increased member bank reserves. As part of the legal reserves of
member banks the gold coin could carry more transactions than it
could when in the vaults of the banks or in the possession of individuals and firms. This measure might prove very effective, particularly if there had been considerable gold in circulation. As a matter
of fact, this measure generally precedes devaluation. Otherwise, the
holders of gold coins would melt them down and sell the bullion to
the government at the higher mint price.
It is apparent that the government of an isolated state in cooperation with a Central Bank could define its monetary unit in

294

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

gold and remain indefinitely "on the gold standard" without subjecting the national price level to deflationary pressures as the result of a shortage of gold. Indeed the real problem in this situation
might be to prevent an inflationary rise in prices. Students of banking in the 19th century were of the opinion that the inflationary
threat could best be warded off if the Central Banks were made as
independent of government as laws could make them. This is the
reason why the Central Bank in this third model is a private bank
and is forbidden to buy new issues of government securities. It was
thought that the government ought to borrow in the open market
on the same terms as any other borrower, risk considered, in the
event that it was unable to cover all its expenditures from ordinary
revenue sources, such as taxes, fees, the sale of public services of
a commercial character, etc. Actually, however, in great emergencies, the Central Bank invariably becomes the agent of government. No laws can protect from the disaster of inflation a people
who are not willing to pay the price that must be paid for price
level stability.
BANKING UNDER FOURTH MODEL:
A MANAGED CURRENCY
The assumptions of this model. In this model the Central Bank
is nationalized, the link between the national money and gold is
cut entirely, i.e., gold is demonetized, and the legal reserves of the
banking system consist exclusively of government legal tender
money. The Bank deals in new as well as old issues of government
debt. The isolation assumption is retained.
Under a managed currency system the value of the national currency will depend to a very considerable extent upon the people's
attitude toward the government. Historically people have had
more faith in gold as a metal than in their governments' promises
to pay and hence have preferred to have their money linked to
gold rather than to the 10Us of their governments.
Nonetheless, in this model we cut the tie with gold and we examine the operation of the banking system on the assumption that
the government is able to maintain the confidence of the people in
the goldless money. We assume that the nationalized Central Bank
is immunized from popular pressures and is able to use its complete
power over the money supply to feed into circulation just the
amount of additional money required to keep the general level of
prices from falling as the volume of exchange increases. Confidence
in the government is complete.

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

295

The demonetization of gold. Under these circumstances the demonetization of gold is entirely logical. Gold now becomes simply
one metal among many. The government gradually disposes of its
vast holdings in the bullion market. The price of gold falls. The
gold mines close down; the stocks and bonds of gold mining companies crash, much as the securities of breweries and distilleries
crashed with the passage of national prohibition in 1918. Legaltender money takes the place of the gold of the previous models.
Henceforth the demand for additional purchasing power is met by
the printing of additional "fiat" money. This is much cheaper than
the old method of digging it out of the ground and storing it in the
vaults of the Central Bank or of the Treasury. And the new money
serves equally well, given our assumption that the government
can and will refrain from using fiat money to defray expenses that
should be met by taxation or by borrowing the real savings of the
people in the open market at rates determined by the supply of
and the demand for savings.
Member bank reserves. In this model the reserves of the Central
Bank and of the member banks consist exclusively of government
legal tender. It would still be possible to erect a fractional-reserve
banking system on this fiat money base, but this would not be
logical since responsibility for regulating the supply of money now
rests unambiguously upon the government. Accordingly the member banks are shorn of the ability to create checkbook money by
the requirement that they shall have one dollar of legal-tender
money back of every dollar of demand liabilities.
The transition to this 100 percent reserve position is easily effected. The Central Bank simply takes over, i.e., rediscounts,
enough of the member bank loans and investments to build up their
legal reserves to the level of their demand deposits.
The banks are once again, as in the First Model, warehouses in
which individuals and firms keep their surplus legal-tender money
for safety and for the convenience of paying by check. They can
no longer create deposits. Their revenues come from charges to customers for handling their accounts.
The savings-investment relationship. Henceforth individuals and
firms wanting to borrow must find other individuals or firms with
surplus money to lend. At the time of the changeover, the owners
of the private banks, the stockholders, might decide not to redistribute to themselves the accumulated surpluses and undivided
profits shown on their balance sheets, but to use them for loans. To
the extent that banks did this, they would be investment banks, not

296

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

commercial banks. They would be lending the real savings of the
stockholders, not the credit of the banks. Private bank credit would
no longer be available to provide the additional purchasing power
needed to support the general level of prices in the expanding economy. Henceforth the government must provide it.
Functional finance.4 In principle the task is very easily accomplished. The Treasury simply gives the Central Bank, which is now
an agency of the Treasury, a noninterest-bearing note, or promise
to pay, in the exact amount required to prevent the price level from
falling, and receives in return a deposit credit on the books of the
Central Bank. On the balance sheet of the Bank the government's
promise to pay appears as a resource, while the deposit appears as
the offsetting liability. The government then pays part of its current expenses by checks drawn on the Central Bank. The receivers
of the checks (government employees or contractors working for
the government, for example) deposit them with their banks and
the banks forward the checks to the Central Bank for collection.
As a result of these transactions the member banks show an increase
in deposits with the Central Bank on the resource side of their
balance sheets and a corresponding increase on the liability side in
the form of deposits due customers. The new money has become
part of the medium of exchange.
We have here a managed currency system completely divorced
from gold. The government operates it on the basis of a comprehensive and sensitive price index. A fall in the index indicates the
need of injecting additional purchasing power into the system; a
rise of the index indicates the need for withdrawing purchasing
power from the system.
The mechanism for withdrawing money from circulation is as
simple as that for injecting it. To withdraw money the Treasury
may follow one of two courses: (1) It may take from the people
through taxes more than it pays out in current expenditures and
use the difference to reduce its noninterest-bearing debt to the
Bank; or (2), it may borrow in the open market, paying whatever
rate of interest market forces require, and build up its deposit with
the Central Bank. In either case individuals draw checks on their
banks in favor of the Treasury. When the Treasury deposits the
checks with the Central Bank, the legal reserves of the private
banks are reduced. This reduces the effective supply of monev and
the inflationary pressure on prices. If the Treasury collects one
4
This is a term carried by Abba P. Lerner. See his The Economics of Control,
Macmillan Company, New York: 1944, pp. 307 ff.

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

297

billion dollars in taxes in a given period of time and spends only
$750 million, or if it borrows $250 million in the open market and
holds the proceeds in the form of an idle deposit, $250 million in
effective money has been withdrawn from circulation.
Assuming that government officials can measure and correctly
diagnose the causes of price level changes, the managed currency
model would appear to provide a simple mechanism for keeping
business activity on a high and even level and at the same time
maintaining general price changes within relatively narrow limits.
In brief, through surplus and deficit financing, the government discharges its task of maintaining precisely the volume of effective
money required to permit the economy to grow and expand at a
stable price level and with a continuously high level of employment. Meantime individual prices would be permitted to rise and
fall, thereby providing the incentives and the guides by which
private firms undertake to satisfy the wants of consumers.
A RECAPITULATION
The reserve ratio and the equation of exchange. First Model. In
this 100 percent gold reserve model the equation of exchange is
MV = FT, and the reserve ratio, M/M' equals unity, or 100 percent. The long-run trend of prices will be downward unless the
society is prepared to allocate a steadily increasing proportion of its
resources to gold mining. Neither the private banks nor the government can influence the long-run behavior of prices.
Second Model. In this model the equation of exchange is MV +
M'V = FT and the reserve ratio, M/M', is less than unity. Since
there is no legal limit to the superstructure of credit which the
banks may erect on the gold base, the theoretical limit of expansion
is infinity. Actually the limit is reached when the public's demand
for gold and gold certificates—pocketbook money—finally forces the
banks to refuse further credits. Until this limit is reached the
private banks are responsible for the long-run behavior of prices.
Third Model: The Central Bank Model. In this model the theoretical limit of expansion is reached when the reserve ratios of the
Central Bank and the member banks reach their legal limits. M/Mf
cannot fall below 1/20 unless the government relaxes the 25 and the
20 percent reserve requirements of the Central Bank and the member banks respectively. Control of the price level is shared between
the Central Bank and the member banks. The Central Bank controls short-run fluctuations in the price level through the devices described previously.

298

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

Fourth Model: Managed Currency Model. In this model gold is
completely demonetized. The responsibility for controlling the
short- and the long-run behavior of prices rests squarely on the
government. Changes in the money supply are the results of deliberate fiscal policy. New money is created when the government
borrows from the Central Bank to defray current expenses; the
money supply is reduced when the government uses tax revenues
to redeem some of its noninterest-bearing notes in the possession
of the Central Bank or borrows in the open market and hoards. The
equation of exchange is MfV = PT in which Mf is inconvertible
legal-tender (fiat) money. The reserve ratio Mf/Mf is unity, or 100
percent, with the credit of the government rather than gold as the
sole backing for the country's money supply.
Is a completely managed currency system workable? From the

point of view of pure theory the managed currency model is far
and away the most economical and most rational way of supplying
our hypothetical closed economy with a medium of exchange. It
does away entirely with the waste involved in digging gold out of
the ground at great expense and then storing it in the vaults of the
Central Bank or of the Treasury and devoting more resources to its
protection against theft. The human and material resources devoted to these purposes can be released and put to work producing
things the people really want. Under the gold standard no one
wants the gold (aside from the relatively small amounts used for
adornment or in the industrial arts) either as a store of value or as a
medium of exchange, as long as there is complete confidence in the
government and in the banks. The Fourth Model thus appears to
be the logical outcome of the process of loosening the connection
between gold and the superstructure of credit by means of which
countries on the gold standard attempted to ward off deflationary
pressures.
But is a completely managed currency system in fact workable
in the kind of world we live? The evidence of history justifies extreme skepticism. Printing paper money is an easy way of raising
public revenues; taxing the people is difficult and unpopular. Governments in the past have invariably succumbed to the temptation
and taken the easy way when freed from the disciplines of the gold
standard. Private competitive banking has not been able to give
us long-run stability even when operating under the disciplines of
the gold standard, but its record to date is vastly superior to that of
governments operating allegedly in the general interest. The really

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

299

disastrous inflations of the past have usually occurred when the responsibility for managing the money supply has been in public
hands. Nonetheless anyone who believes that government in the
future can do what no government in the past has been able to do
can quite logically advocate the adoption of a managed currency
system for an isolated society. But before advocating it for his own
country, he should ask himself whether it would work in the real
world.
Further discussion of this question must be postponed until we
have reviewed the history of commercial banking in the United
States and examined the complications that arise from the fact that
national economies are parts of an international and highly competitive world economy. The next two chapters are devoted to
these topics. Then in Chapter 26 we shall return to the main issue,
the workability of managed currencies in an international world
bound together by the need to maintain international trade.
Questions:
1. State the assumptions governing the analysis of banking under the
First Model, and in the light of those assumptions answer the following:
(a) Would banks collect checks for customers and pay checks for
customers? If so, what would be the inducement?
(b) Would it be profitable for private banks to issue bank notes?
If not, how would the society be provided with pocket-book money,
and what means would be available for determining whether the
amount in circulation was inadequate or excessive?
(c) What functions would commercial banks play in the First Model?
Would there be any distinction between commercial and investment
banking?
(d) Argue for or against the validity of the following propositions:
(i) "The variables in the equation of exchange show that there
would still be short-term fluctuations in the general price level."
(ii) "The long-term trend of the general price level would be
downward."
(iii) "The long-term trend of factoral rewards in both money
and real terms would be downward."
(iv) "The long-term trend in the quoted prices of the common
stock of gold mining companies would not conform with the
trend for common stocks, taken as a whole."
(v) "There could be no such thing as 'forced savings' in this
model."
(vi) I f there were any net investing in this Model it would

300

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT
have to be equal to the amount of net savings and the interest
rate would serve to equalize saving and investing."

2. State the assumptions governing the analysis of banking under the
Second Model; indicate with supporting reasons whether these assumptions require any changes in your answers to the subordinate
questions (a) through (d) in Question 1; and, in addition answer the
following question:
(a) Could there be run-away inflation under the Second Model if
business firms and the government borrowed from the commercial
banks funds needed to finance outlays which should have been financed through the investment banks, or through the plowing back
of profits in the case of business, or through additional taxes in the
case of government?
3. State the assumptions governing the analysis of banking under the
Third Model and on the basis of these assumptions answer the following questions:
(a) Is there any difference in the effect of a legal minimum reserve
requirement in this Third Model and in the Second Model?
(b) Identify the means at the disposal of the Central Bank for (i)
stabilizing the general price level; (ii) influencing the prevailing
short-term rate of interest.
(c) What condition must be satisfied if the Central Bank is to be in
a position to permit the banking system taken as a whole to create
more bank credit than was possible before its establishment? (Assume here that the legal minimum reserves of the private banks are
the same after as before the establishment of the Central Bank.)
(d) Explain how, under the limiting assumptions of this Third Model,
the State can indirectly influence the long-term trend of prices.
(Note: The answer to this question requires use of the following
concepts: (i) open market operations; (ii) legal changes in the character of collateral eligible for rediscount, including the obligations of
the government; (iii) the rediscount rate; (iv) devaluation.)
(e) "19th century advocates of a Central Bank saw in this institution a protection against both excessively large deflationary and excessively large inflationary changes in the national price level.
Actually the Central Banks have proved more effective as a means of
checking deflation than as a means of protecting society from excessive inflation. In fact, they have made the road to inflation unduly
easy by enabling governments to inflate without direct resort to the
printing press/'
(i) Identify the safeguards which 19th century advocates regarded as adequate to prevent governments from using the
Central Bank as "an engine of inflation."
(ii) Indicate the significant changes in the relations of govern-

MANAGEMENT IN AN ISOLATED STATE

301

ments to their Central Banks which lend plausibility to the
statement.
(iii) Argue for or against the proposition that as matters now
stand the outright nationalization of the Central Bank would increase rather than decrease the ability of its directors to use the
powers of the Bank to stabilize the price level.
4. State the assumptions governing the analysis of banking under the
Fourth Model and, on the basis of these assumptions, answer the
following questions:
(a) Define "demonetization of gold" and explain why it is the logical
consequence of a decision to operate the economy on the assumptions
of this Model.
(b) Assuming a political decision to maintain a constant price level
over time, explain in some detail how the government could implement this decision. (Note: In the course of your explanation use and
define the term "functional finance".)
(c) What are the functions of the Central Bank and the private
banks in this Model? Could they create or destroy credit?
(d) Identify the political risks that are involved in the adoption of
this Model. Can you suggest additional risks that would be involved
if we dropped the "isolation" assumption?

24
Currency ana Banking History

of the United States

and banking problems
are interdependent. Logically and historically the currency problem comes first. In this chapter we shall review briefly American
experience and use it to illustrate the principles developed in the
immediately preceding chapters.
THE CURRENCY SYSTEM

Currency defined. The term refers to anything which is generally
acceptable in settlement of business transactions. The "thing" may
consist of (a) some commodity or commodities; (b) paper notes
evidencing 100 percent ownership of given quantities of the commodity or commodities which serve as currency; (c) paper notes
based on the credit of government or of private institutions (such
as banks) and backed in part or not at all by a physical commodity. Thefirsttype of currency is known as a commodity money, the
second as a certificate money, the third as a credit money. A certificate money does not increase the money supply. It merely simplifies the transfer of ownership of the commodity money.
Colonial currencies. In colonial days all sorts of things served as
currency—wampum, tobacco, furs, rice, gold and silver coins of
various foreign countries—Spain, Portugal, France and England—
and paper notes printed by the various colonial governments. The
bulkiness, the perishability, and the lack of standardization made
the nonmetallic commodity currencies very poor media of exchange.
The foreign coins were also unsuitable since they had frequently
been "clipped" or "sweated." Hence they had to be exchanged for
one another and for commodities on the basis of weight. Under
302

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

303

these circumstances there was naturally a tremendous popular demand for some form of credit money. Since private banking was
virtually nonexistent in the colonies, the colonial governments responded to this demand by issuing their own notes, backed sometimes by coins or specie, sometimes by publicly held lands, and
sometimes by nothing but the credit of the government, i.e., its
power to raise through taxes the money needed to redeem the
notes. The notes provided a welcome and needed addition to the
supply of currency. They were in effect noninterest-bearing loans
issued to pay salaries, purchase supplies, and finance public improvements. Those who accepted them gave up services or valuable
goods in exchange for a public promise. Usually the governments
made these notes legal tender, which increased their general acceptibility but also made them forced loans.
As long as the issues were limited and did not exceed the needs
of trade, they provided an economical and highly useful medium
of exchange. Some of the colonial governments were able to resist
the temptation to easy spending represented by this kind of interestfree borrowing. Being able to redeem their notes in specie on demand, few were presented for redemption. They circulated freely
both within the issuing colonies and in neighboring colonies.
Other colonial governments "overissued/' their moneys depreciated,
prices rose, and trade was thrown into confusion.
The Continental currency. During the Revolutionary War both
the states and the Continental Congress issued notes in large quantities. The issues of the Continental Congress were so immense
that the notes became practically worthless— "not worth a Continental." Creditors ran away from their debtors. At war's end the
country had no reliable currency system, and none was achieved
during the life of the Confederacy.
The federal government adopts bimetallism: The United States
dollar. One of the first tasks which the new federal government
undertook was the establishment of a reliable money which would
circulate at par in all parts of the country. The Coinage Act of
1792 declared that the legal money of the country was the "dollar,"
and that it should consist of 371.25 grains of pure silver or 24.75
grains of pure gold. The government undertook to buy and sell
the metals at these "mint prices." We thus started out with a bimetallic money, with the ratio of exchange of the two metals fixed
at 15 to 1—the ratio at which the two metals were actually exchanging at the time in the bullion market.
It was not long, however, before the ratio in the bullion market

304

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

moved against silver. An ounce of gold became worth more than
15 ounces of silver. Consequently gold coins in circulation were
melted down and used to buy bullion silver which was presented
at the mint in exchange for silver dollars. The silver dollars were
then exchanged for gold dollars, and the process which we know
as Gresham's Law continued to operate until all the gold coins had
disappeared from circulation. Up until 1834 the country was, in
fact, on a silver standard. In that year the mint ratio was changed
to approximately 16 to 1. This new ratio soon resulted in an overvaluation of gold at the mint, and now silver disappeared from circulation, much of it being shipped abroad in payment for imports.
For the next 40 years there were no full-bodied silver coins in
circulation for the simple reason that the silver in a silver dollar
was worth more than a dollar. De facto, therefore, we were on
a one-metal standard—gold.
Greenbacks. During the Civil War the federal government
financed its war expenditures in part by the issue of almost onehalf billion dollars of inconvertible United States notes—popularly known as "Greenbacks." As a consequence, domestic prices
rose sharply, gold coins disappeared from circulation, and the notes
fell to a discount against gold. Prices quoted in Greenbacks were
much higher than prices quoted in gold. The gold premium fluctuated with the fortunes of the Northern armies. The Southern
Confederacy also issued notes which depreciated and became
worthless after the final defeat.
After the war, federal expenditures were cut back sharply, revenues remained high, and there were a long series of annual treasury surpluses. These surpluses were used to redeem some of the
interest-bearing debt and some of the Greenbacks. This created
a deflationary pressure on prices and led to loud complaints regarding the lack of money. The situation was particularly acute in the
West and the South where sound private banking was least developed and where more of the daily transactions were settled with
Greenbacks. These complaints forced the government to discontinue the policy of redeeming them. Some one-third of a billion
dollars of Greenbacks are still in circulation. They are known as
United States notes. As rapidly as they return to the Treasury, they
are destroyed and new ones issued in their stead.
The resumption of specie payments. The improved credit of the
government and the willingness of people to accept the Greenbacks led to a slow but steady rise in their value relative to gold.
In 1873 the government announced its intention of eventually re-

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

305

deeming the notes in gold at the prewar mint price. In 1879 this
was done, and from that date until we abandoned the gold standard
in 1933 any holder of Greenbacks could use them to obtain gold
from the Treasury on demand. For all practical purposes they were
as good as gold, and much more convenient to handle.
The adoption of the gold standard. At the same time that the
Congress announced its intention of making the Greenbacks convertible (into gold), it also dropped the provision in the coinage
law regarding silver. At the time this was regarded as a simple
recognition of the fact there had been no full-bodied silver coins
in circulation for over a generation. Most European countries also
shifted from the dual gold and silver standard to the single (gold)
standard at about the same time. The world-wide depression
which set in at just this time carried silver prices down with all
other commodity prices. The price of gold, however, did not and
could not fall since the governments of most of the important industrial countries of the world were committed to buying all the
gold presented to their mints at the fixed prices set by their coinage
laws. Our mint price was $20.67 per fine ounce. Had silver not
been demonetized large quantities of silver would have been offered to our Treasury for coinage into silver dollars. But this outlet
had just been closed. The silver interests, centering in the mining
states of the West, denounced the demonetization of silver, argued
that this was responsible for the collapse of prices, the widespread
bankruptcies, the rise of unemployment, and the general stagnation
of business. They called the demonetization law "the crime of
1873" and demanded the restoration of free and unlimited coinage
of silver. In general the debtor interests in the country lined up on
the side of free silver while the creditor interests defended the decision of 1873. The Democratic party in particular was split wide
open over the issue. William Jennings Bryan became the spokesman for the Western and Southern wings of the party which
favored "free silver." His famous speech in which he pictured the
country as being crucified on a cross of gold won him the party
nomination in 1896, and he was renominated again in 1908.
The "free silver" issue. "Free silver" was probably the single most
controversial issue of the .last two decades of the 19th century.
The Congress refused to return to bimetallism but compromised by
authorizing limited purchases of silver and the issue of silver certificates or full-bodied silver dollars. With various modifications
these purchases have continued up to the present time. The notes
were acceptable to the general public because it was the declared

306

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

policy of the government to redeem them in gold on demand. The
purchases thus constitute an annual subsidy to the silver mining
interests for which there was and is no economic justification at all.
The Congress tolerates it because of the power of the silver bloc
in the Senate—the representatives of a handful of states where silver
mining is important-—and because the subsidy is not reflected
directly in our tax bills. The silver is paid for by the issue of silver
certificates. This issue increases the amount of pocketbook-money,
which is needed, in any event, in a country growing in population,
in wealth, and in the volume of business transactions. The public
is simply not aware that it is paying to a small, well-organized and
privileged group a ridiculously high price for this annual addition
to its currency.
Devaluation of the dollar. With the advent of The Great Depression, country after country abandoned the gold standard. We
followed suit in 1933. For some 10 months we operated with a
completely managed currency. United States dollar exchange was
allowed to fluctuate with changes in the supply of and demand
for dollars to settle international transactions. Individuals were forbidden to hold gold. Then in 1934 we returned to gold but on a
limited basis and with a dollar with a small gold content. The
"mint price" of the new dollar was raised from $20.57 to $35.00 per
ounce. We maintain the prohibition on the private holding of gold
(except for specified commercial purposes). At the stated price,
the Treasury buys all gold offered to it and releases gold under
special licenses when an export of gold is required to meet foreign
obligations. Movements of gold into and out of the Treasury are
accomplished by the issue and the destruction of gold certificates.
These certificates are backed, dollar for dollar, by gold which is
largely buried under ground at Fort Knox, but the certificates are
not redeemable in gold. The government's holding of gold now
amounts to some $22 billion. The nonredeemable gold certificates
constitute the reserves of the banking system.
In this section we have traced the evolution of the commodity
currency, the certificate currency, and the government note currency in the United States. We have seen that this part of the
currency supply consists of gold (and gold certificates), silver (and
silver certificates), and approximately one-third of a billion dollars
of United States notes left over from the Civil War. We now turn
to two other and much more important media of exchange, bank
notes and demand deposits.

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

307

COMMERCIAL BANKING

The history of commercial banking in the United States falls
logically into four periods: (1) the period of the First and Second
Banks of the United States; (2) the period of "wildcat" banking;
(3) the period of the National Bank Act; and (4) the contemporary
Federal Reserve Banking period.
THE FIRST AND SECOND BANKS OF THE UNITED STATES
Shortly before the passage of the Coinage Act of 1792 which
established the dollar as the monetary unit of the country and provided for the free and unlimited coinage of gold and silver dollars
at the ratio of 15 to 1, the Congress passed an act chartering the
First Bank of the United States. The charter, which ran for 20
years, provided for a capital of $10,000,000, one-fifth to be in specie
and the balance in the form of a demand liability against the purchasers of the common stock of the new institution. $2,000,000 of
the capital was to be owned by the government. Foreign investors
purchased most of the remaining stock. (Here is an early example
of how an industrially underdeveloped country can secure foreign
capital to provide itself with a reliable monetary system.) The
Bank was authorized to issue notes up to the amount of its capital
less any debts outstanding. Demand deposits did not figure in the
"debts outstanding/' It was not yet realized that demand deposits
are a bank liability in exactly the same sense as notes outstanding.
This treatment of demand deposits shows two things: how little
developed this form of settlement was at the time; how largely
deposits were what we have called "lodged" rather than "created."
Bank credit at this time circulated almost entirely in the form of
bank notes. To increase the popular acceptability of the notes, they
were made acceptable in payment of obligations to the United
States Government as long as they were redeemable in specie.
For the 20 years of its existence the Bank was an almost unqualified success. Its practice of demanding specie payment on all state
bank notes coming into its possession forced private banks all over
the country to maintain adequate specie reserves against their own
note issues. The result was that the country was now in the possession of a reliable medium of exchange. The lending power of
the state banks was reduced. This tightened the interest rate. But
the very success of the Bank made it unpopular, particularly in the
South and the West where money and credit were scarce and the
need for both was urgent. This unpopularity reached such propor-

308

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

tions that the Congress refused to renew the charter in 1811. This
ended the existence of the First Bank of the United States.
Thereupon the states began chartering private banks very freely.
Between 1811 and 1815 the Secretary of the Treasury estimated
that the number of state banks increased from 88 to 208 and the
volume of state bank notes increased by leaps and bounds. In general specie reserves were so inadequate that the notes were accepted only at considerable discounts against specie. This situation
greatly complicated the financing of the War of 1812. The "overissues" had reached such proportions by 1814 that most of the banks
in the country outside of New England suspended specie payments
entirely. Thereafter the discounts on their notes fell still further.
As a consequence the federal government found it difficult to market its own bonds. Issues totaling about $80,000,000 realized only
about $34,000,000 of hard (specie) money. Since these bonds were
eventually paid off in sound money, the taxpayers were forced to
pay back twice as much as the Government received. This experience convinced even the most bitter opponents of the First Bank
that the country could not get along without a reliable banking
system.
In 1816 the Congress granted a charter (again running for 20
years) to the Second Bank of the United States. Its authorized capital was increased to $35,000,000. After a brief period of poor management, the Bank returned to the practices of its predecessor and
with the same salutary results on state banking practices. But again
the pressure for cheap credit built up popular resentment against
the Bank and again the Congress refused to renew the charter when
it expired in 1836, and again the same chaotic conditions followed.
From 1836 to the creation of the National Banking System in 1863,
the country was without a reliable banking system or a reliable
medium of exchange.
THE ERA OF "WILDCAT" BANKING

With the Bank of the United States out of the picture there was
a mushrooming of privately owned banks operating under state
charters. Except for New England (where the Suffolk Bank of Boston was able to exercise the disciplines hitherto exercised by the
Bank of the United States for the country as a whole) and in a few
states with stringent provisions against over-issue backed by strict
enforcement, these new banks issued notes far in excess of their
specie reserves. To protect the latter the banks frequently established their official head offices (the places at which they undertook

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

309

to redeem their notes in specie) in such inaccessible places that
"they could only be reached by a wildcat." This is the origin of the
expression "wildcat banking" which came into current use at this
time. The excessive issues of bank notes, which began even before the final liquidation of the Second Bank of the United States,
contributed to the inflationary boom of the mid 1830s, the ensuing
collapse, and the panic of 1837 during which most of the banks of
the country had to suspend operations with huge losses to the holders of their notes.
President Andrew Jackson spearheaded the attack against the
Bank. After his election in 1832 he started shifting the accounts
of the federal government from the Bank to private state banks,
frequently on the basis of political service to the party. These
banks came to be known as "the pet banks." When the state banking system collapsed in 1837, the government lost heavily.
The Independent Treasury system. Nonetheless the Congress refused to reverse itself. Instead it provided that the federal government should protect its own funds by keeping them in the Treasury.
Branches of the Treasury were established in the various parts of the
country for this purpose. The Independent Treasury Act (passed in
1840, repealed in 1841, and renewed in 1846) successfully insulated
the government's funds from the fortunes of the private banks but
with very bad effects upon the private banking system. When government receipts exceeded government disbursements, specie was
drained out of the reserves of the private banks. The converse happened when disbursements exceeded revenues. These alternate expansions and contractions of specie in circulation were unrelated
to the monetary needs of the economy and complicated the task
of providing the country with a reliable and flexible banking system.
THE NATIONAL BANKING ACT

During the Civil War, as during the War of 1812, the lack of a
sound private banking system complicated the problem of war
finance. The direct resort to the printing press in connection with
the issue of Greenbacks described earlier was one of the ways in
which the government raised funds. The ensuing price inflation
and the disappearance of gold from circulation convinced the Congress of the imperative need for a sound private banking system.
In 1863 the National Banking Act was passed, with further revisions
in 1864. The purpose of the Act was twofold. First and foremost,
it was designed to provide the country with a reliable medium of
exchange which would have the same value all over the country.

310

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

The second purpose was to create a market for government bonds.
The note-issuing privilege. The Acts provided that banks which
took out national charters might purchase government bonds, deposit them with the Treasurer of the United States, and receive
in return "currency" (for the time being, Greenbacks) up to 90
percent of the current market value of the bonds, although not
more than 90 percent of their par value. In practice this meant
that a bank could earn double interest on a purchase of government
bonds—first the interest on the bonds themselves and, second, interest on any bank loans it might make to customers by lending
its own notes. The Greenbacks provided the legal tender reserve
for redemption purposes. These bank notes, which bore the names
of the issuing banks, were direct obligations of the banks, but they
were now backed to more than 100 percent by the earmarked
bonds deposited with the Treasury. If a bank failed, the proceeds
from the sale of these bonds protected the holders of the notes.
The notes were thus as good as the credit of the United States
government itself. To increase their acceptability they were made
legal tender for all transactions with the government, except for
payments of duties on imports, interest on the national debt, and
for the redemption of the Greenbacks. In this fashion a sound
medium of exchange was provided, but the operation of Gresham's
Law still permitted the unsound notes of the state-chartered banks
to drive the new currency out of circulation. Under the Constitution the federal government could not deprive these banks of the
right to issue notes. A way out was found in 1865. Invoking its
power to tax, the Congress placed a 10 percent tax on state bank
notes which destroyed the profitability of issuing them and led to
their complete disappearance from circulation.
The reserve requirements. Another significant feature of the
National Banking Act was the recognition that demand deposits
represent a bank liability similar in nature to outstanding bank
notes and that excessive credit expansion is possible through an
undue expansion of "created deposits" as well as through an undue
issue of bank notes. To guard against this danger the Act established minimum reserves applicable against deposits and note issues.
National Banks were divided into three classes according to the
sizes of the communities in which they were located—country
banks, reserve city banks, and central reserve city banks—and minimum reserves were specified for each of the three classes, varying
from 15 percent for country banks to 25 percent for reserve city
banks. Originally New York and later Chicago and St. Louis were

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

311

declared to be central reserve cities. Central reserve city banks
were required to hold all of their reserves in their own vaults.
Country banks were authorized to redeposit 60 percent of their reserves in other banks and still treat them as part of their legal
reserves. Reserve city banks could redeposit 50 percent of theirs.
An appraisal of the National Banking Act. The Act finally brought

to an end the long and sorry history of unsound bank notes. The
elimination of state bank notes was an unmixed blessing. The
country was at last in the possession of a form of currency which
was much more economical and convenient than an equal amount
of gold and silver coins and much less liable to abuse than an
equal amount of government fiat money. Nonetheless the experience of the next few decades was to show that the system possessed two serious weaknesses: the inelasticity of the note supply
and the perverse elasticity of total bank credit which resulted from
the redeposit provisions of the Act.
The note issue was inelastic. Notes backed by government
bonds are highly inelastic in quantity. As long as there were
enough government bonds outstanding to support the volume of
notes required to meet the demand for pocketbook money, no difficulties arose. But in the years following the Civil War there was
an enormous expansion of population, of production, and of trade
and hence a need for more and more pocketbook money. This need
could not be satisfied by the National Banks because the revenues
of the federal government quite regularly exceeded its normal expenditures. The difference was applied to the reduction of the Civil
War debt, and this forced a reduction of the volume of national
bank notes. Had it not been for the rapid development of deposit
banking, the deflationary pressure on prices would have been even
greater than it was. The decision to suspend redemptions of the
Greenbacks, the agitation for free silver after 1873, and the limited
silver purchases authorized in 1878 and 1890 represented efforts to
escape from this deflationary price squeeze, which carried the general price level down from 127 in 1865 to 71 in 1894. This secular
inelasticity of the note supply must be counted as a weakness of
the system.
The redeposit privilege. The second weakness of the system developed out of the tendency of the reserve city banks and the country banks to redeposit a large part of their legal reserves with
New York City correspondents because of the willingness of these
banks to pay interest on such deposits. This willingness was due
to the fact that the rapidly developing New York securities market

312

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

created a demand for short-term bank accommodations by persons
engaged in buying and selling and speculating in securities on margin. The New York banks provided a large part of the money
needed for these operations through very short-term loans secured
by the stock market securities as collateral. The result was that the
effective reserves of the reserve city banks and the country banks
were, in fact, much less than the legally required reserves. Any
sudden and widespread demand for cash by banks in any part of
the country could and frequently did create a chain reaction with
the pressure concentrating on the reserves of the central reserve
city banks, particularly those in New York. To keep their reserves
above the 25 percent legal minimium, they were forced to call
loans. Borrowers, in turn, were forced to sell securities, thereby depressing stock market prices; falling stock market prices reinforced
the demand for cash.
"Runs'* on the banks. Bitter experience in the panics of 1873,
1893, and 1907 proved that even moderate increases in the demand
for cash by country and reserve city banks could endanger the entire system. On each of these three occasions it was necessary for
the banks to suspend payments in cash, i.e., to refuse to honor
checks drawn on them. During these periods cash was at a
premium, just as in the colonial days gold and silver were at a
premium over depreciated paper currency.
Periods of panic were also marked by so-called "runs" on the individual banks in the country. Persons with deposits in the banks
were very sensitive to rumors that their banks might not be able
to honor checks with cash. In their stampede to withdraw their
accounts before the banks stopped payment, they would force even
the soundest of banks to do just that—stop payments in cash.
This problem was not solved under the National Banking Act
nor even under the Federal Reserve Act to be discussed below. It
was not attacked directly until 1933; in the Emergency Banking
Act of that year, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was
created. The Corporation was reorganized and given permanent
status under the Banking Act of 1935. The Corporation guarantees
against loss the deposit of each bank customer in an insured bank
up to a maximum figure, originally set at $5,000 but now raised to
$10,000.
The mere existence of this kind of guarantee seems to be sufficient to keep the average depositor from joining others in sudden
demands for cash. This is fortunate, because even the F.D.I.C.
would find it difficult to cover current demand deposits, totaling

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

313

over $100 billion, with the current stock of cash, totaling around
$30 billion.
The capital funds of the Corporation were originally provided
partly by the Treasury and partly by the Federal Reserve Banks.
In addition, all deposits of insured banks are subject to a yearly
assessment of K2 percent. When a bank fails, the insured portion
of each depositor's account is made available to that depositor,
usually in the form of a deposit in another bank in the same area.
The Corporation takes over the affairs of the failed bank and sees
it through the liquidation period. The Corporation also exercises
certain regulatory powers over all insured banks, particularly those
not affiliated with the Federal Reserve System. Deposits in more
than 95 percent of all commercial banks are now insured by the
F.D.I.C.
THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
The Federal Reserve Act which was passed in the first year of
the Woodrow Wilson Administration was designed to remedy the
weaknesses which had been revealed by 50 years of experience
under the National Banking Act.
The structure of the system. The Federal Reserve Act represented
an ingenious reconciliation of the popular suspicions regarding the
concentration of financial power which central banking appeared to
involve, and the practical necessity of devising a flexible yet sound
banking system in which both notes and deposits would be safe
and yet capable of being expanded and contracted to meet the
ever-changing requirements of trade.
Instead of a single central bank of the European type, similar
to the one in our central bank model in the preceding chapter, the
Act established 12 regional banks, each located in the principal
city of its region or district. They are tied together through the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Technically
the Federal Reserve Banks are privately owned since all of the
capital is supplied by the Member Banks. All National Banks have
to be members; state-chartered banks may be admitted to membership if they satisfy certain minimum requirements. Each member
is obliged to keep its subscription to the capital of the Reserve Bank
of its district at a fixed percentage of its own capital. With a few
minor exceptions which do not concern us the Federal Reserve
Banks do business only with the Member Banks, which are required
to keep all of their legal reserves with their Federal Reserve Banks,
and with the federal government which also keeps large balances

314

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

with the Reserve Banks. By debiting and crediting these accounts,
the Federals handle the enormous daily volume of check clearings
not only for their members but also for the many small nonmember
banks, since the latter use Member Banks as their correspondents.
The earnings of the Banks are limited to 6 percent of their capital
and surpluses. Excess earnings revert to the Treasury.
The Board of Governors consists of seven members appointed
by the President and confirmed by the Senate. The Board of
Directors of each Federal Reserve Bank consists of nine members;
six elected by the member banks, half from their own fraternity,
half from the leading businessmen of the region, and three appointed by the Board of Governors as representatives of the general
public. The Directors appoint the President and the Vice-President
and the officers and employees. The first two appointments must
have the approval of the Board of Governors, and all salaries and
wages must likewise have their approval.
Central direction is provided through the Board of Governors.
Some local autonomy is preserved through the powers vested in
the Boards of Directors of the 12 Banks. The members of these
Boards are familiar with local conditions and can thus influence,
to some extent, the decisions of the Governors. The Board of Governors and its large technical staff and its wider knowledge of national and international developments, in turn, influence the thinking of those at the regional level.
The Federal Reserve Banks are able to influence the entire
private banking system—which is made up of approximately 7,000
member banks and 7,000 small nonmember state banks—because
of its ability to create and destroy credit instruments directly, and
its ability to influence the creation and destruction of credit instruments by the Member Banks. Their ability to create and destroy credit instruments directly is due to the fact that they
themselves operate on the basis of fractional reserves, applicable
against their demand deposits and their note issues. Originally
their reserves were gold coin and bullion. At present they consist
of the gold certificates which the federal government issued when
it called in all private gold holdings. The Federals are now authorized to incur demand liabilities (demand deposits and Federal Reserve notes) up to four times their gold certificate reserves. This
means that they can lend to their customers, the member banks
and the government, without the necessity of calling old loans, as
long as their reserve ratios are above the 25 percent level, and it is
their practice to maintain their reserves well above this level. Their

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

315

ability to affect the legal reserves of the member banks enables
them to influence the credit policies of these institutions. Their influence is further increased by the monopoly of the note-issue privilege conferred upon them by the Federal Reserve Act. Neither the
state nor the national banks can now issue their own notes. To
meet the demands of their customers for cash they are dependent
almost entirely on silver certificates, Greenbacks, and Federal Reserve notes. The supply of Greenbacks is completely inelastic; the
supply of silver certificates is relatively inelastic, the increase being
determined by the law governing the purchase of silver. The elastic
element is provided by the Federal Reserve notes. Banks may obtain these as required to satisfy the needs of their customers by
drawing down their reserves with their Federal Reserve Banks. An
increase in Federal Reserve notes in circulation reduces their excess
reserves and hence their ability to create demand deposits.
The purposes of the Federal Reserve System. The primary purposes of those who framed the Federal Reserve Act appear to have
been four in number:
(1) to centralize the reserves of all the national banks into a
common pool so as to prevent the development of the chain
reactions (the runs on the banks) which occurred periodically under the National Banking Act;
(2) to provide an agency to serve the government in fiscal matters and thus eliminate the cumbersome and unsatisfactory
Independent Treasury system;
(3) to provide an elastic currency that would expand and contract to meet the seasonal and cyclical needs of the business
community; and
(4) to provide a means of checking either inflationary expansions or deflationary contractions of bank credit.
We shall first discuss these objectives, then analyze the means
by which they were to be realized, and finally attempt an evaluation of the successes and failures of the system.
An appraisal of the objectives. 1. The pooling of reserves. On
balance the centralization of the reserves of all of the banks appears
to have been a desirable objective. In the first place it reduced
the volume of reserves needed to support a given level of credit
since all of the banks now have a pool of funds from which to
draw as needed (under specified conditions) to meet unusual demands for cash. This represents an economizing of a scarce resource and strengthens the liquidity of the banking system as a

316

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

whole. On the other hand, this very pooling of reserves has serious

inflationary implications in the event that a government and a Congress bent on inflation are able to control the policies of the Federal
Reserve System. But, if a people come to the conclusion that inflation is preferable to deflation, they can have their way in any case;
hence, on balance, this first objective appears to be in the general
interest.
2. The fiscal agency function. The defects of the Independent
Treasury system were mentioned earlier. The system was tolerable
as long as federal taxing and spending were small. At the present
time the private banking system would be under intolerable strains
if the short-term fluctuations in government balances, which figure
in the billions of dollars, were alternately to flood them with cash
and then denude them of reserves. Although the experiences of
recent years raise legitimate doubts regarding many of the actual
policies followed by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System,
there is general agreement that a central bank should serve as the
fiscal agent of the government.
3. The provision of an elastic currency. The wisdom of providing an elastic currency is more open to question. If by elastic is
meant merely the possibility of expanding the note issue to meet
temporary and unusual demands for cash, such as that occasioned
by panics, there is no doubt that the note issue should be elastic.
When the term refers to the possibility of a steady increase of bank
credit over time, then the objective becomes more doubtful. Unless
great restraint is exercised, the Federal Reserve System can become
an even more insidious engine of inflation than the government
printing presses because the inflationary process becomes obscured
and public opinion becomes confused.
4. General price level stabilization. The last objective, "to provide
a means of checking either inflationary expansions or deflationary
contractions of bank credit" comes very close to being synonymous
with the objective of stabilizing the general level of prices. This
raises an issue which will be discussed at some length in the next
two chapters. It suffices here to point out that this objective can
very easily clash with the requirements of the gold standard. If
rising prices are caused by an influx of gold, then prices should be
allowed to rise until international price level adjustments bring the
gold movement to a halt. The converse holds true if falling prices
are due to an outflow of gold. Our final appraisal of this objective
must be deferred.
The means for realizing these objectives. In view of the discussion

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

317

of banking under the Central Bank model in the preceding chapter
the discussion of means can be disposed of very briefly. The powers given to the Central Bank in that model were in fact substantially the same as those possessed by the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. Those powers, it will be recalled, were
four in number:
(a) the power to alter at its discretion its own rediscount rate;
(b) the power to liberalize or tighten up on the character of
the bank paper it would accept for rediscount;
(c) the power to engage in open market operations;
(d) the power to impose changes in member bank reserve requirements.
In this section we shall see how successfully, in fact, these powers were used to accomplish the four objectives discussed in the
preceding section.
The pooling of reserves was accomplished by the requirement
that all member banks keep their legal reserves with the Federal
Reserve Banks of their respective districts. The fiscal agency objective was accomplished by authorizing the Secretary of the Treasury to deposit public money with the Federal Reserve Banks and to
require the Banks to act as fiscal agents of the United States. The
Secretary of the Treasury may also use Member Banks as depositories. The old Independent Treasury system was finally liquidated
in 1921.
To provide an elastic currency. It was provided that the Federal
Reserve Banks should have the power to issue notes against reserves
which were to consist of commercial paper (promissory notes and
trade and bankers' acceptances) which had been rediscounted by
the Federal Reserve for its member banks, plus a 40% gold reserve.
It was believed that, as business activity increased, the volume of
commercial paper in the hands of the Federal Reserve would increase, thus permitting an expansion of notes; conversely a decline
in business activity would result in a contraction in their volume.
These provisions have been changed so that any bank asset acceptable to the Federal Reserve Bank may now be used as collateral for
the issuance of Federal Reserve Notes and the gold requirement has
been reduced to 25%.
The rediscount rate. In order to control the expansion and contraction of credit the Federal Reserve was given two basic powers:
first, the power to establish a rediscount rate; second, the power to
engage in open market operations. It was believed that, as the com-

318

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

mercial banks expanded their loans, the necessity of maintaining
their legal reserves would necessitate their taking some of the notes
which they had discounted to the Federal Reserve and borrowing
with these notes as collateral. If the Federal Reserve rediscount
rate were high, the member banks would be unwilling, so the argument ran, to pay the charge. Hence they would be unable to make
further loans to customers. If, on the other hand, the rate were low,
the banks would be encouraged to rediscount and to seek more
business. This system of encouraging or discouraging the expansion
of commercial bank credit had worked very well in England, but
there was an essential difference between the English system and
our own. In England the rediscount rate usually stood above the
rate charged by the private banks to their customers so that rediscounting was normally costly; in the United States, however, the rediscount rate has normally been below the level charged bank
customers so that there has always been an incentive to rediscount.
Fortunately the tradition against being in debt to the Central Bank
(the Federals in this case) has prevented any excessive use of borrowing from the Federal Reserves. In this country changes in the
rediscount rate have been more of a signal of the thinking of the
Federal Reserve officials as to whether credit should be expanded
or contracted than an actual weapon for controlling credit directly.
Open market operation. Open market operations constitute a
much more potent weapon of credit control. How they affect reserves and hence the capacity of member banks to extend credit has
been sufficiently explained in the preceding chapter. The reader
should review this explanation at this point to make sure that he
understands clearly why Federal Reserve Bank sales of securities
tend to tighten bank credit and purchases tend to loosen bank credit.
An appraisal of rediscounting. During most of the 40 years since
the establishment of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank rediscount rate has not been very effective. The large
increase in the gold stock of the country and the corresponding increase in bank reserves occurring during and immediately following World War I freed the banks from the need to go to the Federals
for additional credit. In the years 1929-1933 borrowings of member
banks did rise slightly as they sought to replenish cash depleted by
the unusual volume of withdrawals of currency by customers, but
even then the total amount of such borrowing was little more than
one billion dollars. Not again until 1952 were Member Banks forced
to resort to the Federal Reserve for credit to any significant extent
and again the pressure was merely temporary.

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

319

The early years (1929-32) of The Great Depression proved that
the Federal Reserve could not, through its rediscount rate, prevent
widespread bank failures in the face of a severe decline in business
activity accompanied by large-scale withdrawal of funds from the
banks by their customers. Nearly 6,000 banks with approximately
$4,000,000,000 of demand deposits were forced to suspend their
activities during the four year period—nearly 25% of the total number
of banks. These figures do not include the 3,000 odd banks which
were closed during the brief 1933 Bank Holiday and which did not
subsequently reopen their doors. The wave of failures had become
so acute by early 1933 that a nation-wide Bank Holiday was declared
in March of 1933 shortly after Franklin D. Roosevelt was inaugurated as President. In the six year period 1930-35 the total number
of banks was reduced from almost 24,000 to barely 16,000.
In the years immediately following the Bank Holiday confidence
in the banks was restored, funds flowed back to the banks, and
excess reserves rose to the unprecedented level of $3,000,000,000 in
1936. The capacity for a great expansion of the money supply was
present, but lacking demand for this money, the expansion did not
occur. Unemployment during this period ranged from 10,000,000
to 12,000,000, thus blasting the hopes of the framers of the Federal
Reserve System that they had devised a mechanism capable of preventing the up- and downswings of business activity which had characterized the behavior of the American economy from the very
beginning of our history.
Devaluation and World War II. In an effort to expand American
exports and raise domestic prices we abandoned the gold standard
in 1933 and, when we returned 10 months later, it was with a dollar
with a lower gold content.
The resulting increase in the mint price of gold contributed to the
substantial influx of gold into the United States and to the creation
of the excess reserves of the banking system mentioned above. The
inflationary threat raised by these excess reserves led the Congress
to give the Board of Governors the power to alter member bank reserve requirements upward by as much as 100%. This was in 1935.
In two successive steps—in August of 1936 and May 1937, minimum
legal reserves were doubled. These actions reduced the excess reserves of the member banks to something less than $1,000,000,000,
and forced them to restrict credit. Some economists attribute the
short but very sharp recession of late 1937 and early 1938 to this
destruction of excess reserves. The episode appears to prove that
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System can stop an

320

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

inflationary rise in the general price level, even if they cannot stop
a deflationary fall in the general price level, provided the political
authorities are willing to back them up.
With economic recovery excess reserves began to rise againreaching a peak of $7,000,000,000 in 1941. The greater portion of
this increase was due to the transfer of gold to the United States as
war threatened and then broke out in Europe. During the two and
one-half years between mid 1938 and the end of 1940 the gold stock
rose by $9,000,000,000. Total currency in circulation and demand
deposits rose by about $14,000,000,000 during the same period,
which prevented excess reserves from increasing even more than
they did. Unemployment, however, still stood in the neighborhood
of 8,000,000 at the end of 1940—one in 7 of the total civilian labor
force.
Entry of the United States into the war in 1941 and the subsequent government deficits averaging nearly $50,000,000,000 annually for the ensuing four years resulted in an increase of almost
$100,000,000,000 in the total money supply and brought the excess
reserves of the banking system down to approximately $1,000,000,000. Had it not been for the power of the Federal Reserve to purchase government securities, thus providing reserves for the member
banks, this tremendous expansion of the money supply would have
been impossible. Early in the war it became apparent that the Congress was not prepared to finance the war out of taxes. Large-scale
borrowing was necessary. Treasury officials hoped that individuals
and nonbanking institutions would purchase the bulk of these securities, and that it would be unnecessary to resort to borrowing
from the banking system. At the same time, however, they were
unwilling to permit the interest rate on the government debt to rise
to a level that would induce a large amount of voluntary saving.
This decision made it necessary for the Treasury to work out an
agreement with the Federal Reserve that the latter would support
the price of government securities at par. In effect this meant that
any individual or institution purchasing government bonds was assured of a steady resale market so that no risk of loss was involved.
With this guarantee banks were able and willing to purchase these
securities to the extent permitted by Treasury regulations and hold
them as an interest-bearing secondary reserve against their deposits,
in full confidence that if they needed to convert them into legal
reserves or currency they could do so at any time. The banks, including the Federal Reserve Banks themselves, purchased approx-

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

321

imately $90,000,000,000 of government securities, thus accounting
for 90% of the total increase in the monetary supply.
The war was financed at a constant 2% interest rate, an accomplishment previously undreamed of for a conflict of such duration
and magnitude. The banks held at the end of the war approximately
$90,000,000,000 of government securities which could be converted
into cash or reserves at their own option so long as the Federal Reserve continued its policy of supporting the price of government
securities at par. In so far as low interest rates on government securities tend to depress interest rates on other forms of indebtedness,
the cost of borrowed money to private investors was at an artificially
low level.
This artificial rate made it necessary for the government to ration
credit. Regulation W setting forth minimum down payments on
installment contracts and setting a maximum period for repayment
of installment loans, and Regulation X prescribing minimum down
payments on real estate purchases financed by banks, are examples
of the rationing techniques (often called selective controls) which
were employed.
A further consequence followed. So long as the Federal Reserve
stood ready to purchase all government securities offered it for sale,
the Federal Reserve could not limit the expansion of bank credit
through the conventional methods of open market operations. Selling government bonds would have depressed their price. In short,
approximately half the increase in the public debt arising from the
war was directly monetized through sale of bonds to the banking
system, and these bonds in the hands of the banks constituted a
threat of even further increases in the monetary supply so long as
they were readily convertible into reserves.
Whatever may have been the merits of supporting government
bonds during the war, there is general agreement that continuation
of this policy following the end of the conflict greatly reduced the
power of the Federal Reserve to combat the inflationary tendencies
that were present in our economy. It was not until the sharp postwar rise in prices had alarmed the public that the Federal Reserve
finally abandoned the policy of supporting government security
issues at par (March, 1951). Since that time the Federal Reserve has
intervened in the market from time to time to maintain an "orderly"
market or to loosen monetary "tightness/' Interest rates, however,
have risen sharply from their war-time levels and anti-inflationary
weapons have apparently worked well, despite the end of direct
credit controls such as Regulations W and X.

322

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

An over-all appraisal of the Federal Reserve System. Out of forty

years' experience with the operation of the Federal Reserve System
it is possible to reach certain conclusions as to its effectiveness and
value. It has proved highly successful in performing such functions
as the rapid clearing of checks, serving as fiscal agent for the government, and in providing reserves for banks in temporary distress.
On the other hand, it has been clearly demonstrated that the powers
granted the system to check both inflation and deflation have worked
less well than expected. The war experience indicates that the
System can actually contribute to inflationary pressures whenever
the functions of the system are directed primarily to the job of
supporting Treasury policy. If control of inflation is to be subordinated to this end, the Federal Reserve will be forced to employ
direct controls rather than general monetary controls in its attack on
rapidly increasing monetary supplies. Postwar experience has
shown, however, that the anti-inflation weapons at the disposal of
the Board of Governors can be used effectively whenever the Board
is free to use them. On the side of checking deflation, our experience has been less hopeful. There seems to be no good evidence
that monetary measures are likely to be successful in preventing a
downswing of the business cycle. Perhaps the best hope is that, if
anti-inflationary powers can be used wisely, the height of the upswing will be reduced so that inability to check a downswing will
be less serious than it has proved in the past.
SUMMARY

This review of the currency and banking history of the United
States illustrates the preponderant influence which government policy has had on the monetary system. Although we have, on the
whole, had a sound currency and have never experienced any of
the drastic inflations which have gripped so many nations of the
world, most impartial authorities would agree that we have been
only partially successful in providing a satisfactory money. Wide
up- and down-movements in the price level have prevented money
from serving as an adequate store of value for particular individuals. Direct government intervention has been the cause of some
of these swings, but others have been occasioned by behavior patterns of the private banking system. It is not, perhaps, too much
to say that we can define in theory an ideal monetary system, particularly for an isolated economy, but our ability to translate this
ideal into practice in a complex international world has still to be
demonstrated. Despite this somewhat pessimistic conclusion it is

CURRENCY AND BANKING HISTORY

323

still true that more than 160 years of experiment have resulted in
a system in which our currency is universally acceptable and individuals can rely, for the most part, on the soundness of the banks
with which they do business. These are not merely minor accomplishments when we consider the chaotic conditions of our currency
during the Revolutionary War and immediately thereafter, the era
of "wildcat" banking, and even so recent an occurrence as The
Great Depression with its widespread bank failures climaxed by a
nationwide Bank Holiday, to say nothing of the chaotic monetary
conditions in most parts of the contemporary world.
Still remaining to be solved, however, is the great issue of the
proper relationship between the government and the banking system. Perhaps the great task of the monetary expert is to reconcile
the conflicting demands of government fiscal policy and sound
banking policy (see Chapters 41 and 42). We can be sure that the
answer does not lie wholly in the abdication of monetary policy
to fiscal policy, but we can be almost equally certain that the banking system can never become wholly independent of the needs
of the government which creates it and provides the environment
within which it operates.
After this review of American monetary experience we are now
in a position to consider the international aspects of monetary
management.
Questions:
1. Define the term "currency"; identify the three types mentioned in
the text; give an example of each type from American history.
2. "During the period when gold certificates circulated freely in the
United States they did not increase the country's money supply."
Explain and indicate the present legal status of the gold certificate.
3. Define "bimetallism"; identify the period during which this country
had a bimetallic standard, the metals which formed the basis of the
standard, and the reasons for the shift to the gold standard.
4. It is stated in the text that the framers of the Federal Reserve System sought to realize four objectives. Identify these four objectives and indicate with supporting reasons the extent to which (a)
the First and Second Banks of the United States and (b) the National Banking Act realized these objectives.
5. Identify the Independent Treasury System and explain the reasons
for its creation and for its final liquidation.

324

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

6. Identify the weaknesses of the National Banking Act and state
briefly how the framers of the Federal Reserve Act attempted to
deal with them.
7. Trace briefly the history of the bank note issue privilege from the
establishment of the First Bank of the United States to date.
8. Identify the means by which the Federal Reserve System can influence the supply of currency and credit in the United States.
9. "Forty years of experience has shown that the Federal Reserve System's power to halt an inflationary boom is greater than its power
to induce a recovery/' Do you agree or disagree? Cite historical
incidents in support of your position.
10. "The Federal Reserve System has proved in fact to be a more
powerful instrument for inflation than the government printing
press." Do you agree or disagree? Cite historical incidents in support of your position.
11. In the event that your answer to Question 10 is inconsistent with
your answer to Question 9, is there any way in which you can reconcile the inconsistency?
12. Explain (a) how it was possible for the federal government to
finance approximately one-half of the costs of World War II without causing any appreciable rise in the interest rate; and (b) why
this method of financing contributed to the sharp rise in the price
level in the immediate post-war period.

25
International Trade
ana the Gold Standard

purpose of the next two
chapters is tofindout whether it would be desirable for countries having trading relations with their neighbors to adopt monetary systems completely divorced from gold. We shall first identify the
forces that lead to international exchanges of goods and services
and note how they operate when all countries are on the gold standard. This is the subject matter of the present chapter. In the next
chapter we shall examine the problems that arise when countries go off the gold standard. We retain the assumption that
the peoples in the several countries operate their economies on the
basis of private property and private enterprise. To simplify the
exposition it is also assumed that the governments refrain from
interposing artificial obstacles to international movements of goods,
services, and people.
JLHE

THE THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Modern production involves an enormous number of exchanges
of goods and services. As raw materials are separated from the
ground, processed, and moved physically from place to place and
from firm to firm en route to final consumers, each firm takes legal
title to the goods, reimburses in money its suppliers, and is in turn
reimbursed by its customers for the "value-added" as a result of its
productive activities. Prices paid by final consumers to end-firms
must be enough to cover all of the necessary outlays of all of the
firms, if the production flow is to continue unabated. If the final
prices more than cover outlays, new productive capacity will be
added; if they fall short, capacity will be withdrawn.
325

326

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

Most of these exchanges involve persons and firms located in
different areas. The exchanges (trade) are local, regional, interregional, or international, depending upon the location of the
parties involved.
In economies organized on the basis of private property and private enterprise, firms tend to locate where the costs of assembling
and processing resources and marketing the outputs are at a minimum. In a world in which there were no political frontiers, in which
owners of resources were free to move, able to move, and willing to
move with a view to maximizing the advantages to be gained (a)
from putting their resources to work and (b) from spending their
income claims, a definite location pattern would emerge. It would
be an optimum pattern in the sense that no large number of persons could better themselves by moving from one place to another,
and no firm could reduce its expenses of production by shifting
from one place to another. Each firm would be of optimum size
and would be producing at its optimum rate and at minimum total
average unit cost. The higher rents that certain firms would have
to pay for the use of superior land would appear to them as costs.
Consequently allfirmsproducing any given product would have the
same unit costs regardless of location. The real wages of workers of
comparable skills would be the same everywhere. The marginal
productivity of capital would everywhere be the same. There
would be no profits. Rents, and rents only, would show pronounced
differences in different parts of the world. This would be due to
the fact that land is immobile and that production is subject to the
universal law of diminishing returns. The attractive power of any
particular area would be exhausted when the rents paid by firms
for the land necessary for their operations, and by factor owners in
their roles as consumers for the land needed for their homes, just
offset the economies to be gained from the particular location.
The principle of absolute advantage. Under these circumstances
the firms properly located in a particular place would have an absolute advantage over firms located in unsuitable places, but no advantage over properly located competitors. Inter-area trade would
be on the basis of absolute advantage. Bananas would not be
grown in Maine and potatoes would not be grown in the Bahamas.
Iron ore is widely distributed under the earth's crust. Production,
however, would be confined to the marginal and better than marginal mines. The firms operating the better mines would have no
advantage over those operating poorer mines, since their cost ad-

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

327

vantage would be offset by the rents they had to pay to the owners
of the intramarginal deposits.
The owners of the resources devoted to mining would buy everything they needed from the sales of the iron ore. How far the ore
would have to move to reach ore-using firms would depend upon
the expenses of moving ore and the many other forces determining
the location of these firms. Similar forces would be at work in the
case of all other raw-material-using firms. Since the economies of
size prevail in many industries, the individual plants in these industries would be widely scattered. Each plant would possess a
limited monopoly in its immediate trading area, but would be in
competition with rival firms at the frontiers of its natural trading
area.
Cities would develop at points of low transportation costs, and
the resulting concentration of consumer purchasing power would
draw to these centers the firms that had most to gain from proximity to final consumers. Urban land rents would tend to impose an
optimum size on each city. No urban center would possess the
complete battery of firms necessary for self-sufficiency, nor would
any region or nation. There would be local, regional, and national
specialization, and a vast amount of inter-area trade. Firms would
be located on the basis of the absolute advantages to be gained
from their precise locations. None would have any relative advantage over competitors, as any economies resulting from location
would accrue to landlords in the form of rent.
The principle of comparative advantage. The world-wide equalization of real wage rates for similar work and of interest rates for
investments of equal risk requires an impossible degree of geographical mobility of labor and capital. Actually capital is only
relatively mobile, and labor is highly immobile. Consequently in
the real world large and persistent area differences in factoral rewards and in levels of living would persist even though governments permitted goods and people to move freely from area to area
in response to inter-area price differences and inter-area differences
in factoral earnings.
If a wealthy area, W, has a well-trained labor force, an ample
supply of managerial talents, abundant natural resources, i.e., a
favorable man-land ratio, and if capital growth exceeds the rate of
population growth, the marginal productivity of labor will be much
higher than in a poor area, P, where the opposite of these favorable
conditions prevails. Per capita output will be much lower in P than
in W, and rents, interest, and profits will absorb a much larger

328

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

proportion of the smaller annual product than they will in W. Exchanges between the two areas will not necessarily close the gap
in living levels. On the contrary, the gap may widen unless capital
movements from W to P and population movements from P to W
occur on a far larger scale than can be expected in a world of
diverse languages and cultures.
Even within the United States, surprisingly large differences in
regional per capita incomes, and hence in regional levels of living,
have persisted for generations despite the fact that very large interregional movements of both capital and labor go on continuously.
The difficulty of closing the gap even under exceptionally favorable
circumstances is shown by the regional per capita income figures in
Table 25-1. The accompanying map shows per capita income payments to individuals according to a state-by-state breakdown.
The figures in this table show that the per capita incomes in the
poorest regions rose more rapidly than those in the wealthier
regions. In this sense interregional trade and interregional factor
movements are tending to equalize factoral rewards in the United
States exactly as economic theory would lead us to expect. At the
same time it is important to note that the absolute gap between the
richest and the poorest region widened in this 28-year period. In
1929 there was a $582 differential between the Middle East and the
Southeast. In 1947 the absolute gap separating the Southeast from
the Middle East and the Far West, which had meantime moved
into a tie for top position, had increased to $676. This development
within the United States shows why the competition of a relatively
unindustrialized region becomes progressively more and more
severe as it starts on the road to industrialization. We shall have
occasion to come back to this point in the discussion of the Federal
Government's wage policy in Chapter 32.
Opportunity costs. In a world with considerable factor immobility a substantial part of inter-area trade is based on the principle
of comparative rather than absolute advantage. The favored areas
are induced to specialize in the production of those things for which
they are best suited and to depend upon less favored areas for most
of their needs. They could produce most of these other things, but
only at the cost of taking their limited resources out of their most
effective uses. What they would have to give up, the sacrifices they
would have to make, are known in economics as "opportunity
costs/* These costs are what induce firms in an area to specialize
on the basis of comparative advantage. By selling a portion of the
output of their specialties to the less favored areas, firms are able

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

329

TABLE 2 5 - 1
PER CAPITA INCOMES BY REGIONS, 1 9 2 9 AND 1 9 4 7 *

Amount in Dollars

As Percentage of
National Per Capita
Income

State and Region

1929

1947

1929

1947

Continental U.S.A.
New England
Middle East
Central
Northwest
Far West
Southeast
Southwest

680
838
926
720

1323
1444
1559
1391
1373
1559

100
123
136
106

100
109
118
105
104
118
67
82

534
865
344

464

79

883

127
51

1081

68

* Source: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Survey of Current Business, September, 1948, p. 17.

PER CAPITA INCOME PAYMENTS
TO INDIVIDUALS, 1951

• I $1,800 and over
M
$1,500-$l,799
| ^ 1 $1,200-$1,499
H i Under $1,200
United States $1,584
U.S. Department of COOUMKO, Ofttc. of BwintM Economic*

330

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

to obtain (import) other things at less sacrifice than if they produced them locally. In similar fashion the less favored areas
specialize in the production of those things for which they have
either an absolute advantage growing out of climate or the presence
of valuable natural resources, or for which their disadvantage is
least. Capital movements from the favored areas to the less favored
areas and population movements from the less to the more favored
areas would increase the over-all effectiveness with which the
world's resources are used, but even if these movements are inadequate, peoples everywhere will be better off if they specialize and
trade on the basis of comparative advantage than if they refuse to
trade.
How do people in an area discover the most suitable lines of
activity in which to specialize? The answer is that the price mechanism automatically solves the problem. In favored areas the abundance of capital, know-how and specialized skills, relative to land
and unskilled labor, lead firms to concentrate upon the production
of those goods and services that make relatively little use of land
and the more common types of unskilled and semi-skilled labor, and
much use of skilled and supervisory labor and capital in the form
of machinery, power, and other labor-saving devices. The relatively
high prices paid to the owners of the scarce factors and the relatively low prices paid to the owners of the more abundant factors
reward the firms that devote themselves to the appropriate lines of
production and penalize those that fail to conform. The "opportunity costs" are too high to make it financially profitable to produce locally the goods and services that can be produced more
effectively by firms in other areas where the proportionality of the
factors of production and hence the relative levels of factor prices
are different.
Conforming firms require no protection. What counts in interarea trade is not physical output differences but money price differences. Goods move from areas where the money cost of producing
them is low to areas where the money cost of producing them is
high. In so far as the resources of an area are devoted to the production of things for which the area has a comparative advantage,
the money cost of producing them will always be lower than in
other areas. Hence the firms engaged in producing these things do
not need to be protected from the competition of firms located in
other areas. The high money prices that firms in high income areas
have to pay for the relatively scarce factors of production force
them to specialize in the production of goods which do not require

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

331

in their production large quantities of the scarce factors. It is only
when firms in a wealthy area try to specialize and produce things
for which the area possesses no comparative advantage that they
suffer from outside competition. Unless the people in the area are
willing to pay more to local producers than they would have to pay
to "foreign" producers, such firms will be forced out of business.
Firms producing a product in an area which possesses no comparative advantage, or wishing to continue to produce it after the
area has lost its comparative advantage, usually complain of unfair
competition. If they are located in an area where real wages are
high, they are likely to charge that firms located in less favored
areas are "exploiting" their workers, and most workers in high wage
areas will be inclined to concur in the charge. The charge, of
course, rests upon a misunderstanding. The real competitors of
these firms will not be the extra regional firms, but the local firms
that have successfully adjusted their production to market forces.
The "conforming" firms outbid the "nonconforming" firms for the
locality's limited resources. The nonconforming firms can be protected only at the expense of the conforming firms. The latter are
forced to surrender to the nonconforming firms some of the area's
scarce resources. As a result, firms that require no protection are
forced to contract. The full advantages of the territorial division of
labor are lost. The population, as a whole, is less abundantly provided for; the general level of living falls.
The principle of comparative advantage does more than explain why
rich and poor countries both gain from specialization and trade. It explains, for example, why a specialized worker will hire others to do
things he can do better himself. The successful lawyer may be an excellent typist. When he first hangs out his shingle he finds it profitable to
type out his own briefs and take care of his own correspondence. As his
practice grows and his time becomes more valuable, he hires a typist.
It pays him to do so, regardless of his excellence as a typist, just as soon
as he is able to earn a trifle more than her salary from the additional
legal work he is thereby able to handle. As the demands upon his legal
knowledge increase, his comparative advantage in typing turns into a
comparative disadvantage. It is the high hourly earnings of the strictly
legal aspects of his work, and not the relatively low rate per hour of
typists, that finally force him to abandon the typewriter. His net income
would be reduced if a law were passed fixing an hourly rate for typists so
high as to make it again profitable for him to do his own typing. Nor
would such a law help typists as a group, though it would be very beneficial to the fortunate few who could still find jobs.

332

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

In brief, the theory of international trade is only an extension of
the general theory of pricing developed earlier. It explains not only
how the competitive efforts at profit maximization by firms within
a single homogeneous market area lead to the most effective use
of the resources of the area, but also how, through inter-area trade,
these same efforts promote the most effective use of the resources
of all the nations involved. International trade tends to bring about
a dovetailing of production programs in areas widely separated in
space and markedly different from one another in their natural and
human endowments.
We now want to know whether this theory fits a world in which
the different nations have different moneys. In the next section we
explain the international functioning of the price mechanism in a
world in which all of the nations define their national moneys in
terms of fixed quantities of gold. In the following chapter we return to the problem of managed currencies divorced from gold in
an international and interdependent world.

THE INTERNATIONAL GOLD STANDARD
By adopting gold as the basis of their money systems countries
automatically and unintentionally create an international gold
standard. The value of each country's currency is tied to that of
the others. Each can be expressed in terms of its neighbor's money.
Their gold contents establish "pars of exchange," or parities. No
one needing a foreign money will pay more than parity plus the
costs of shipping to the country in question the gold equivalent; no
one with a claim to foreign money and wishing to convert it into
his own national money will offer more of the foreign money than
parity less the cost of shipping the gold equivalent from the foreign country to his own country. Insurance and loss of interest en
route are included in shipping costs. These costs establish the extreme limits of deviation from parity. They determine what are
known as the "gold import" and the "gold export" points. The dayto-day prices of foreign moneys move between these points in response to changes in the supply of and the demand for the several
currencies.
For almost 100 years prior to World War I, except for the period 18611879 when the United States was off the gold standard, the par of exchange between the American dollar and the British pound sterling was
4.866 with the export and import points at approximately $4.89 and $4.85.
The relationship of the dollar to a number of the other national moneys
as it was in the decade before World War I are shown here.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD
Name of the Money
French franc
German mark
Austro-Hungarian crown
Italian lire
Russian ruble

333

Par of Exchange
$0,193
0.238
0.203
0.193
0.515

As long as the several countries adhere to the gold standard, their
governments have only limited control over the behavior of their
national moneys. Each one is in the position of the single bank in
a national banking system. Any single bank can be denuded of
cash if it persists in granting credits to customers at a time when
the majority of the banks are curtailing credits, or refusing to expand them. In similar fashion, a single country can be denuded of
its gold holdings if the banks persist in expanding credits at a time
when the banks in the other countries are restricting credits. How
this comes about calls for an understanding of a nation's balance of
payments and the balancing mechanism.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS OF A NATION
Banks are under obligation to make payments abroad whenever
their customers have to make payments to foreigners. Conversely,
they gain claims to the moneys of foreign countries whenever foreigners have to make payments to their customers. Fundamentally,
these obligations are no different from those arising in connection
with transactions between parties located in different parts of a
single country. In Chapter 22 we showed how these interregional
obligations get settled through clearing house operations.
There is one important difference, however, between interregional and international transactions. The latter involve different
moneys. An Englishman wants to pay his obligations in pounds
sterling; an American wants to be paid in dollars. International
banking provides the mechanism for making these payments.
Large banks located in the great trading centers of the world
keep accounts in large banks in other countries with which their
clients have dealings, just as the Prudential Bank of Middletown
kept accounts with "correspondents" in New York, Chicago, and
San Francisco. The claims and counterclaims arising as a result of
international transactions are handled through these banks and, for
the most part, get settled by cancellations on the books of the banks
in exactly the same fashion as domestic transactions get settled

334

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

through regional and national clearing house operations. In both
cases gold movements serve merely to clear up small balances.
The items in a nation's balance of payments: The current ac-

count. In general a nation's exports pay for its imports. Exports
figure as credits on the right-hand side of a nation's balance sheet;
imports as debits on the left-hand side. Exports give rise to claims
on the moneys of foreign countries; imports create claims on the
money of the importing country. The items in a nation's balance
sheet are usually classified as visible and invisible. Merchandise
exports and imports are the visible items. All the others are invisible. The most important of these invisible items are:
(a) Tourist expenditures: An American spending the summer in
France needs French francs. The effect on the balance of payments
is exactly the same as if he stayed at home and imported an equivalent amount of French goods. His expenditure appears as a debit
on the left-hand side of the balance sheet. The expenditures of foreigners visiting the United States appear as credits on the opposite
side of the balance sheet. For the United States tourist expenditures represent a large debit item; for a country like Switzerland
the converse holds.
(b) Shipping services: When American-owned vessels carry foreigners or the goods of foreign firms, dollars are earned. They
appear on the right-hand side of the balance sheet as a service
export. Travel by Americans on foreign ships and shipments of
American goods in foreign bottoms represent service imports and
appear on the debit side of the balance sheet.
(c) Insurance: Billions of dollars move annually in international
trade. They are insured against loss by insurance companies. Payments by foreigners to American firms are equivalent to exports;
the amounts paid by Americans to foreign companies are equivalent
to imports.
(d) Banking: The large banks in the great ports of the world
provide much of the short-time credit involved in international exchanges. To the extent that foreigners make use of American
credits, the American banks gain claims to foreign moneys; and
the reverse, of course, holds true.
(e) Interest: The interest due on investments by foreigners in
American enterprises constitutes a dollar claim on the American
economy. It figures in the accounts exactly like an import of goods.
Conversely, interest on American foreign investments has the same
effect as an equivalent export of American goods.
(f) Unrequited items: Immigrant remittances, gifts, war debts,

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

335

reparation payments by defeated countries, costs of armies of occupations, all are examples of one-sided transactions or unrequited
items. They have to be allowed for in striking the annual balance.
During the latter part of the 19th and the first decade of this century
recent immigrants to the United States sent several hundred millions of
dollars annually to relatives in their old homes. These remittances had
the same effect as an equivalent import of goods. They paid for a part
of our exports of goods and services. At the present time the American
government, through our foreign aid program, and private individuals,
through such organizations as CARE, are making billions of dollars available annually to governments and individuals in foreign countries. They
support a considerable part of our large merchandise exports. Following
World War I Germany, Austria, and the other defeated countries were
required to make very large payments to the victors, and our allies owed
us close to $10 billion. If these obligations were to be met, the debtors
had to increase their exports very substantially or decrease their imports
in order to earn the necessary foreign moneys, and the creditors had to
increase their imports correspondingly or decrease their exports. These
one-sided payments called for drastic reallocations of resources in both
the paying and receiving countries. On neither side was the will to make
these changes present, and consequently the payments were never made
in full. The efforts to collect them contributed to the debacle of the
international gold standard, the return to extreme protectionism, and
probably to World War II.
The items in a nation's balance of payments: The capital account.
Merchandise transactions and items (a) to (f) in the foregoing list
enter into a nation's balance of payments on current account. If the
debits and credits are equal, a country is on a pay-as-you-go basis.
The value of the claims it gains on foreigners as a result of exporting goods and services equals the value of the claims gained by
foreigners as a result of selling goods and services.
(g) Capital movements: A country seldom ends the year with an
exact balance on current account. Normally its firms and individual
citizens are either buying abroad more than other firms and citizens
are selling abroad, or else selling abroad more than other firms and
citizens are buying abroad. According as the balance runs for or
against it, a country is said to have exported or imported capital.
The difference represents an international capital investment. It
may be a short- or a long-term investment; it may be an equity investment or a fixed income investment. Bank deposits and the
short-term notes of governments represent the principal forms in
which foreigners make short-term investments. They come into ex-

336

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

istence automatically as a result of short-run fluctuations in international trading. If these short-run claims run steadily against a
country, however, they must be converted into long-term investments or reduced by an out-movement of gold.
A young and growing country, such as the United States was throughout the 19th century, regularly imported more than it was able to pay
for by its exports, visible and invisible. This was possible because men
of wealth in England, Holland, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland and other
countries found investment opportunities here more promising than in
their own countries. They bought American real estate, federal and
state bonds and the stocks and bonds of railroad, manufacturing, financial
and commercial companies. With the funds thus made available, individuals and firms in the United States were able to buy, year after year,
more than they were able to pay for by their current exports of goods
and services. This represented a capital movement from areas where
capital was relatively abundant to an area where it was relatively scarce.
From the beginning of World War I, and continuing up to the present
time, capital movements have been primarily from the United States to
other parts of the world. Moreover, the foreign investments of this period, more than those of the 19th century, have been away from equities
and in favor of claims to fixed incomes. This type of investment is especially troublesome in periods of depression. The borrowers have to secure the foreign exchange at the very time when the fall in exports has
cut down the supply. Equity returns, on the other hand (dividends on
common stock, for example), are automatically reduced in bad times.
Thus the form which international investment takes affects the ability of
a country to honor its international obligations. The more a government
dependent on foreign capital goes into business itself, the greater will be
the volume of fixed income claims burdening its balance on current
account.
The successful performance of the international gold standard during
the 19th century was due in part to the fact that so much of the international lending of that period was in the form of equities. Growing socialization and the increasing hostility in borrowing countries to the foreign
control of domestic enterprises, which common stock ownership gives, are
responsible for this shift in the character of international lending. It has
contributed to the breakdown of the international gold standard and to
the trend toward managed national currencies, which is the subject matter of the next chapter.

(h) Gold movements: Gold movements occur when a country's
imports exceed its exports by more than the amount which foreigners are willing to invest in the country. Prior to a gold movement
there is likely to be a sharp rise in the volume of demand deposits

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

337

owned by foreign banks. This represents an involuntary and unintentional investment. Finding no profitable use for them within the
country the foreign banks withdraw them by purchasing gold. The
gold may be shipped abroad or "ear-marked." In either event the
transaction reduces the deposits of foreign banks with the banks of
the country losing gold and builds up their own gold reserves. This
outmovement of gold does not occur until the money of the country
under pressure has fallen to the gold "export point."
THE FINANCING OF FOREIGN TRANSACTIONS

International transactions are handled through the Foreign Exchange Departments of a limited number of the larger banks in the
different countries. Each maintains deposits with "foreign correspondents" (i.e., banks) in the countries with which its citizens
have frequent dealings. Because of these deposits anyone in possession of the money of one country can buy the money of another
country in the precise amount required. AH he has to do is draw
a check on his own bank. If his bank itself deals in the foreign
exchange (money) of the country involved, i.e., if it has a deposit
with a foreign "correspondent" there, the deal is completed directly.
If not, the arrangement is made through one of the large banks
specializing in the foreign exchanges, with which the smaller banks
maintain balances.
It is evident that a very large volume of international trade can
be handled without the need of international gold movements.
Gold moves only when the flow of claims is preponderantly in one
direction. Even then a gold movement may not be necessary.
Several devices are available for avoiding or, at least, postponing
a gold movement.
1. Triangular and multilateral settlements. The claims and coun-

terclaims arising out of trade between any two countries are seldom
equal. Country A, for example, may consistently import more in
value than it exports to Country B; Country B, in turn, may regularly buy more than it sells to Country C; and Country C may buy
more than its sells to Country A. Under these circumstances A
banks will have deposits in C banks, while B banks will have deposits in A banks, and C banks will have deposits in B banks. Because of these deposits citizens of A can pay their debts to citizens
of B in the money of Country C. These settlements simultaneously
clear up C's debts to A and B's debts to C. Through an international exchange of bank credits, firms in the three countries have
been able to buy and sell to one another without the necessity of

338

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

an international gold movement. Gold has served simply as the
common measure of value.
The real world consists not of three but of dozens of countries with independent monetary systems. Nonetheless, during the heyday of the international gold standard, the bulk of international transactions were
finally settled by exchanges of credits between the banks in the several
countries. Trade was multilateral, not triangular or bilateral. Each country had trading relations with most of the other countries in the system.
Final balances were settled through a few great banks located in the
world's great trading centers, like London, Paris, New York, Berlin,
Amsterdam, Tokyo, etc. Floating balances tended to accumulate in the
form of deposits and short-term investments in the British money market,
because the pound sterling was the international money. It was accepted
everywhere because England's trade was extensive, and it was known
that the Central Bank of that country (the Bank of England) stood ready
to pay any foreign claim in gold and on demand.
2. Short-term capital movements provided a second method of

avoiding a gold movement. As long as foreigners had complete
confidence in the convertibility of a country's money, an increase
of the Central Bank rediscount rate in a country threatened with
a loss of gold could usually be counted upon to attract foreign
funds. Foreign banks and foreign investors bought the money of
the country under pressure in order to take advantage of the higher
interest rate, thereby keeping the money under pressure from falling to the "gold export" point.
Despite these and other devices small gold movements constantly
took place under the old international gold standard.
For one thing, gold figured as an ordinary article of export in the
trade of a few countries with large mining operations. These gold
exports supplied the entire international community with the new
gold required to support national price levels.
Gold also had to move from a country whenever a persistent
deficit in its balance of payments on current account could not
be offset by foreign long-term loans or by the short-term investments described previously.
These small international gold movements had effects far greater
than their magnitude would lead one to expect. This was due to
their multiplier effect on the supply of money under Central Bankfractional gold reserve banking.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

339

THE RULES OF THE INTERNATIONAL GOLD STANDARD

If a country is to stay on the gold standard its Central Bank must
take steps to check excessive losses of gold. These steps are not
pleasant. It requires a strong and relatively independent Central
Bank to initiate them and to carry them through. The banking
laws of the 19th century were designed to give the Central Banks
the resources and the independence needed to impose upon their
economies the disciplines of the international gold standard.
The persistent loss of gold flashes an automatic signal to the
responsible officers of the Central Bank that the national price level
is too high. It is then incumbent on the Central Bank to protect
its gold holdings which represent, in effect, the foundation on
which rests the country's whole pyramid of bank credits. The
means at its disposal were explained in Chapter 23. The Bank
can (a) increase its rediscount rate; (b) tighten up on the character of acceptable rediscount paper; (c) increase the down payment requirements on purchases of stock exchange securities and
consumer durables; (d) sell government bonds (open market operations); and (e) increase member bank legal reserve requirements.
These operations reduce the legal reserves of member banks and
thus force them to protect themselves.
The means at the disposal of the member banks were also discussed earlier. They can (a) rediscount commercial paper with
the Central Bank; (b) sell some of their secondary reserves; (c)
reduce loans to customers; and (d) raise their discount rates.
The rise in the Central Bank rediscount rate signals the need
for caution in the making of new loans and cuts into member bank
profits to the extent that they have to resort to the Central Bank.
Central Bank sales of "governments" and member bank sales of
"governments" and of the securities of private firms depress stock
exchange values and thus raise the effective rate of interest on investments of every sort. Money becomes dear. The pressure is
now passed on to the business community which converts physical
assets into cash so as to get out of debt to the banks.
The impact of dear money falls first on business inventories which
are largely financed by bank loans. Businessmen all along the line,
from the producers of raw materials to the retailers in direct contact with final consumers, push their sales and cut down on their
purchases. These efforts lead to price reductions which spread
rapidly throughout the economic system. Profit margins fall, and

340

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

now the pressure is passed on from the firms to the owners of the
factors of production.
The providers of risk capital—the equity owners—are the first
sufferers. As long as inventory liquidation continues, most firms
fail to cover total costs and cut-backs in production spread through
the system. Business failures increase. Some unemployment is inevitable, and now the pressure is on the hourly rated and salaried
workers. Wages and salaries fall, while the fear of unemployment
tends to improve work performance.
The fall in wages reduces the pressure on firms. The interest
burden, on the other hand, tends to increase. Interest on outstanding bonds must be paid, and the cost of new money needed to
carry inventories and to meet reduced payrolls actually increases.
In brief, these developments bring about a general price decline. The price decline, in turn, relieves the pressure on the country's foreign exchanges. Imports decline and exports increase. This
follows from the fact that goods and services move internationally
in response to price differences. Deflation in a country that is losing gold thus tends to re-establish equilibrium in its balance of
payments with other countries.
The rules of the gold standard also apply to a country which
is steadily gaining gold. The influx of gold should be allowed to
bring about a rise in the domestic price level. The Central Bank
can promote this price rise by (a) lowering its rediscount rate, (b)
liberalizing the character of acceptable rediscount paper, (c) reducing down payment requirements on stock purchases and on the
purchase of consumer durables, and (d) buying government bonds
in the open market.
We shall have more to say later about the forces that stop a recession and bring about a recovery. It suffices to note here that,
under an international gold standard, the fall in prices in countries losing gold and the rise in prices in countries gaining gold
reduce and finally remove the pressures on the former. As prices
are brought into line, the exports of the gold-losing countries revive
and imports decline. The drain on the gold supply ceases, and a
return flow of specie may be expected, particularly if foreign savers
see good investment opportunities in the depressed value of the
country's securities. Business recessions and business recoveries become international. The international gold standard stops a boom
in a single country before it reaches runaway proportions, and halts
a depression before it takes on panic proportions. Thus, on bal-

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

341

ance, it has a stabilizing influence. But it also limits the power
of a single government to deal with a depression as it sees fit.
INTERDEPENDENCE OF NATIONAL PRICE LEVELS
As long as national moneys are freely convertible at ratios determined by their gold contents, international exchanges of goods and
services tie national prices and national price levels together.
In a completely free trade world the prices of internationally
traded commodities would be roughly the same in all markets. Persistent local price differences would be due to costs of transportation from points of origin to points of consumption, and to
differences in local costs of production. If the short-run demand for
a particular commodity in a particular market drove the price above
the world level, imports would increase, the price would fall in
that market, and it would rise in the markets from which the
product had been diverted.
The uniform prices of products entering into world trade would,
in turn, exercise an influence on the prices of goods and services
which, for technical reasons, cannot enter into world trade. Thus
suppose an internationally traded commodity, steel, for example, is
being produced in Country A under such favorable conditions that
the profits of the steel companies exceed those of firms producing
goods and services that can be marketed only locally. Let us call
the latter the Y firms. Competition will bring about a reallocation
of resources. The firms in the steel industry will bid for the man
power and capital attached to the Yfirmswith a view to expanding
production; and new firms will be formed to take advantage of the
favorable profit situation. Marginal Y firms will be forced out of
business. As steel capacity and output expand, prices and profits
will fall; as capacity and output in the Y firms contract, prices and
profits will rise. Equilibrium is re-established when the rewards
to the owners of the factors in all firms are equalized.
Thus international trade in a limited number of goods and services ties national price levels, as a whole, together and exercises an
influence on factoral rewards as well. If trade is permitted to flow
freely, and if competition in the several countries is reasonably
effective, man power and resources get distributed between the X
and the Y industries in the different countries in such fashion that,
in the absence of capital or population movements, the national
balances of payments on current account will be brought into equilibrium. The value of the exports of each country, visible and invisible, will equal the value of its imports, visible and invisible.

342

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

Some firms in each country find it profitable to specialize in the
production of those internationally traded commodities in which
they enjoy the greatest advantage or in which their disadvantage
is least. The real incomes of the people in the various countries will
be as high as is possible, given the industriousness, the resources,
the technology, and the leadership at their disposal. It will be
higher than if the governments prohibited or seriously limited imports by high tariffs or by quantitative restrictions. This is due to
the fact that restrictions on imports restrict exports and thus narrow markets and prevent firms from realizing the full economies of
specialization.
At the end of the section on the theory of international trade
we asked whether the existence of sovereign nations with different
monetary units would prevent the price mechanism from bringing
about national specialization on the basis of absolute and comparative advantage. The answer is clearly "no" if all of the countries
adhere to the gold standard and allow goods and services to move
internationally on the basis of national price differences.
In the next chapter we explore the problem in a world in which
one or all countries operate with managed currencies.
Questions:
1. Summarize the policy conclusions that follow logically from the
Model analysis of Chapter 23 and state the relationship of this and
the next chapter to those conclusions.
2. Describe the world-wide industrial and location pattern that would
finally emerge in a free trade world in which market competition
everywhere was "pure."
3. Given this pattern would (i) land rents and land values be everywhere the same? (ii) interest rates? (iii) real wage rates for
workers of comparable skills? (iv) would there be geographical
specialization and inter-area exchange or trade? (v) if so, would
this trade be based on the principle of absolute advantage or comparative advantage?
4. Define and distinguish between the principles of absolute advantage
and comparative advantage and identify the conditions necessary
to give rise to inter-area trade based on the principle of comparative
advantage. Give examples of international trade based on each of
the principles.
5. Explain in some detail how competitive market forces enable firms

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD STANDARD

343

in different areas to discover the economic activities for which they
possess a comparative advantage.
6. Assume a peaceful world state in which the "what," "who," and "how
much" decisions discussed in Chapter 3 and the "where" decisions
with which we are concerned in this chapter are all determined by
a World Planning Board on the basis of the political votes of the
citizens instead of their dollar votes. Discuss critically the problems
involved in assigning to each of the former nations and to each
region within these larger areas the precise economic activities
which would maximize the world's output of useful goods and services.
7. "A high national level of living depends primarily on a high level
of real wages. The American tariff is responsible for the exceptionally high real wages prevailing in this country. Free trade, even
though introduced gradually, would bring our real wages down to
the very much lower levels prevailing abroad. The world as a whole
might benefit, but it would be at our expense."
Argue for or against the economic validity of this statement.
8. (a) Identify the principal items that make up a country's balance
of payments (i) on current account, (ii) on capital account.
(b) Indicate in the case of each item whether it constitutes a liability or an asset and explain the sense in which the two terms are
used.
(c) Identify the ways in which a country's adverse balance of payments on current account can be corrected within the limiting requirements of the international gold standard.
(d) Define unfavorable balance of trade. Is it the same as an
unfavorable balance of payments on current account?
(e) Argue for or against the proposition that the balance of payments of a country, like the balance sheet of a single bank, must of
necessity always be "in balance."
9. Using the distinction between the balance of payments on current
account and on capital account explain (i) the conditions that lead
to international gold movements and (ii) the principal domestic
conditions that must prevail in a country losing gold if the loss of
gold is to re-establish an economically sound balance; (iii) the
internal adjustments that the loss of gold tends to bring about and
why and how the loss of gold tends to produce these domestic adjustments. Do the same thing for a country that gains gold.
10. State the so-called rules of the international gold standard and
identify the social groups that have to bear the major share of the

344

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT
burden of adjustment (i) in countries losing gold and (ii) in countries gaining gold.

11. Argue for or against the proposition that the efforts of central banks
to stabilize national price levels tend to prevent the adjustments
required by the "rules of the international gold standard" and have
therefore contributed to the breakdown of the standard.

26
Revolt Against
the Gold Standard

JLHE gold standard, as described
in the preceding chapter, no longer exists. For almost a generation now most countries have operated with more or less managed
currencies, and many economists doubt the wisdom of even attempting to return to gold. They hold that its rules prevent governments from fulfilling their primary obligation, which is to
maintain domestic full employment. The way in which governments are supposed to carry out this responsibility is discussed
later. Here it suffices to point out why the gold standard is regarded as an obstacle to the maintenance of full employment.
The indictment. Briefly the case against the gold standard rests
on the fact that it deprives a government of control of its domestic
price level. If domestic prices rise relative to foreign prices, the
domestic price level must be brought back into line, else the domestic market will be inundated with foreign goods. But firms
cannot meet these foreign prices and stay in business, unless they
can get their expenses of production down. Money wages, interest,
and rents must fall. Wages in particular must fall, since, direct and
indirect, they make up some three-quarters of the expenses of a
nation's firms. Workers, however, will not accept wage cuts as long
as they are all employed. Consequently firms lose money, reduce
employment, and only then, when the unemployed begin competing for jobs, do money wages break.
Unemployment and wage cuts, however, so runs the argument,
produce no automatic corrective. Idle workers are poor buyers,
and the shadow of unemployment induces employed workers and
other groups as well to cut their spending. Even a small increase
345

346

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

in unemployment, it is held, results in such a reduction in spending
as to spread losses throughout the economic system. The relief
of lower costs gained by firms in the export industries, and by those
subject to international competition, is more than offset by the
losses experienced by firms catering exclusively to the domestic
market. Consequently factoral rewards must fall still further before business, as a whole, can again become profitable. Meantime
the reduction in imports and the increase in exports destroy jobs
abroad, start deflationary unemployment there, and reduce international trading generally. Local unemployment fans out and becomes world-wide unemployment with an enormous waste of
potential production, a lowering of levels of living everywhere, and
unnecessary tragedies to millions of families. The automatic forces
of the market are regarded as powerless to halt the contraction until it has run its full course.1 Governments, and governments alone,
are in a position to prevent this sequence of events. But to succeed
they must abandon the 19th century idea that the rate at which
a nation's money exchanges for the moneys of its trading partners
is sacrosanct. Maintenance of employment is more important than
the maintenance of the gold standard. The gold standard forces
countries to adopt a "beggar-thy-neighbor" method of adjusting
to what is, after all, a general deficiency of purchasing power.
Such, in brief, is one widely held argument against the international
gold standard.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine the case for managed
currencies. We shall proceed as follows. First we shall describe
the international balancing mechanism in the case of a single country in an international community in which all the other countries
remain under the disciplines of the gold standard. We shall discover that it is, in fact, much easier for any one country, particularly if it is small, to solve the difficulties of too high a price level
by going off gold and letting its money seek its own level (devaluation) than by forcing its domestic price level down far enough
to stop the loss of gold (deflation). But we shall also find that,
even for a small country, the prospects of success will depend on
whether it is or is not experiencing serious unemployment at the
time it launches the experiment. Accordingly we shall examine the
devaluation solution for a single country first on the assumption
of substantial unemployment and then on the assumption of relatively little unemployment. Thereafter we shall consider the pos1

See Chapter 29, p. 411 below for the forces that are supposed to halt the contraction
and start the recovery.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

347

sibilities of maintaining and expanding international trade in a
world in which all countries undertake to manage their currencies
in the manner described in our fourth model in Chapter 23.
But first we must define our terms.
Some Definitions

Deflation and inflation. In Chapter 21 the terms inflation and
deflation were used to describe general price level movements. We
found that large price level movements were usually associated
with large changes in the money supply (or in its velocity of circulation), but the words themselves were used to indicate the direction of change of the price level and not the direction of change
in the money supply. Inflation, we said, means a general rise in
prices; deflation a general fall in prices—both measured by some
comprehensive price index. In this chapter we shall be concerned
with the processes by which a general rise or general fall in the
price level is brought about. Here the nouns and the corresponding verbs (to inflate, to deflate) have policy implications. The purpose is to bring the domestic price level into line with foreign price
levels with a view to stopping undesirable large international gold
movements. The assumption is that a government can deliberately
bring about a change in its domestic price level through the devices
described in Chapters 22 and 23.
Devaluation and appreciation. The terms devaluation and appreciation are used to describe changes in the rates at which a national money exchanges for other moneys or for gold. When the
United States Government reduced the gold content of the dollar
from approximately 22 to 15 grains of fine gold, this was an act of
devaluation. When the British Government instructed the Bank
of England to buy and sell dollars at approximately $2.80 to the
pound sterling, instead of the previous rate of $4.01, that too was
an act of devaluation, despite the fact that, from 1931 on, the pound
sterling had ceased to be defined or redeemed in terms of a fixed
quantity of gold. When recently the Canadian Government refrained from interfering with market forces which drove the
Canadian dollar to a premium against the American dollar, this was
the result of a decision to allow the Canadian dollar to appreciate.
Controlled inflation and deflation are the appropriate procedures
for countries that intend to remain on the gold standard. We discussed these procedures in the preceding chapter. We showed (a)
how small international gold movements affect the reserve positions
of the commercial banks of the countries involved, (b) how changes

348

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

in bank reserves tend to produce slowly rising prices (inflation) in
countries gaining gold, and slowly falling prices (deflation) in countries losing gold; (c) how these price level changes tend to reverse
the directions of international gold movements; and finally (d)
why enormous volumes of international transactions can be settled
year after year by surprisingly small international gold movements.
The accompanying diagram (Fig. 26-1) may help make clear the
interdependence of national price levels under the international
gold standard and the way in which small gold movements react
on national price levels. Our universe is two countries, A and B.

m
FIG.

26-1

Price levels are shown on the Y-axis; time periods, on the X-axis.
At the outset of period I, A's balance of payments is such as to draw
gold from B. Its price level is rising; that of B is falling. This
change slows up, halts, and finally reverses the gold movement.
Beginning about the middle of period I, A begins to lose gold to
B. This forces a credit contraction in A and permits banks in B
to expand credits. Consequently, prices in A begin to fall while
those in B begin to rise. During period II the price level relationships are reversed and the stage is set for the movement into period III.
With this picture of the balancing mechanism under the international gold standard before us, we now want to know whether,
in fact, governments can divorce the behavior of their price levels
from those of their trading partners by abandoning gold, and yet
keep the prices of their export industries competitive in foreign
markets. Theoretically this can be done by permitting exchange
rate fluctuations to take the place of price level fluctuations. Controlled devaluation and appreciation are the appropriate procedures
for countries that intend to manage their own price levels, without
regard to the behavior of prices in other countries.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

349

CURRENCY MANAGEMENT RY A SINGLE COUNTRY

If a country's price level rises relative to foreign price levels, the
value of imports, visible and invisible, will exceed the value of
exports, visible and invisible. Its balance of payments on current
account will be unfavorable. Unless foreigners are prepared to invest in the country, or make charitable contributions, the country
will lose foreign exchange. It will be confronted with "balance of
payments" difficulties. It must choose between deflation and devaluation, or quantitative restrictions on imports. The mechanism
of adjustment by deflation has already been described. In this section the devaluation alternative is examined. The assumption is
maintained that the government refrains from imposing duties or
quantitative restrictions on imports. Buyers are permitted to buy
in the cheapest market and sellers to sell in the dearest market.
Devaluation: The process. The first step in the devaluation
method of adjustment is to prohibit the private holding of gold and
of foreign exchanges. The second step is to forbid the export of
gold, except on government account. Thereafter, foreigners cannot
convert their claims into gold and withdraw them in that form.
They can repatriate them only as they are able to buy acceptable
foreign exchange, i.e., the money of a third country which is freely
convertible into their own money. What they will have to pay for
foreign exchange will depend upon how much foreign exchange the
devaluing country is currently earning from its exports.
The forces determining the value of the country's money can
best be explained by a concrete example. Let us assume a world
consisting of four countries, F, D, P, and M. Their national moneys,
all defined in terms of gold, are called francs, dollars, pounds, and
marks, respectively. For some years the official parities of these
moneys in terms of dollars had been as follows:
The franc
0.20
The pound . . . . 4.00
The mark
0.25
Because of a sharp rise in the price level in F, that country has
been losing gold. The government goes off gold, while the others
remain on the old gold standard. The value of dollar, pound, and
mark exchange, in terms of F's money, is now determined by the
demand for these moneys and the quantities which the Central
Bank of F is prepared to release. At the old parities the quantities demanded exceed the quantities supplied. Consequently the

350

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

bids of those holding francs and wishing to exchange them for these
other moneys force the franc below the old gold export point. It
requires more francs to buy these moneys, but as their prices rise
the quantities that will be taken decline. Henceforth these moneys
are like apples, or any other commodity for which there is a competitive market. New prices emerge which equate quantities offered and quantities demanded. The franc falls until a new
equilibrium is reached at, say, 15 cents in terms of dollars, instead
of the old parity of 20 cents, and with comparable prices for the
other moneys. The franc has depreciated by 25 percent. Or we
may say that the franc has been devalued by 25 percent.
Devaluation: The effects. What effects will this devaluation have
upon the economy of country F?
Overnight the prices of F's exportable goods and services have
become cheaper to foreigners, although there has been no reduction
in their prices, as expressed in francs. At the same time all foreign
goods and services now cost more in terms of francs, despite the
fact that their prices, as expressed in the moneys of the countries
of origin, remain unchanged. F has become a good place for foreigners to buy in and a poor place for them to sell to. This change
relieves the pressure on F's balance of payments.
The extent of the relief can be made clear by an example. Let
us suppose that fine linen is an important article of export for
country F and that in the year prior to devaluation 10,000 bolts
were sold to firms in country D at 100 francs, or $20 a bolt. At the
new rate of exchange F's linen firms can afford to sell at $15 a
bolt and still realize 100 francs a bolt. The price will not necessarily
fall to this level. If the demand for linen in country D has an
elasticity greater than unity, it may prove possible to sell 12,000
bolts at $18 per bolt. This is equivalent to 120 francs at the new
rate of exchange. If so, the exported linen now yields $216,000 (12,000 X $18) instead of the $200,000 (10,000 X $20) under the old
gold standard. When the dollars are converted into francs, the linen
exporters realize 1,440,000 francs as against the one million francs
realized prior to devaluation. The same holds more or less true for
all other export products, depending on foreign elasticities of
demand.
It is obvious that devaluation has increased enormously the
profits of F's export industries. Consequently they bid for additional
labor and capital. If the resources of the economy were fully employed at the time, this additional labor and capital must be withdrawn from firms catering to the domestic market. The result is a

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

351

change in the composition of the national output and in the pattern
of resource utilization. More goods are produced for export and
more resources are employed in the export industries. Less goods
and less resources are available for satisfying domestic needs. The
level of living in F falls, but the pressure on the country's balance
of payments has been relieved; and this has been accomplished
without any fall in the domestic price level and with only such
transitional domestic unemployment as is involved in the shifting
of labor from the domestically oriented to the export-oriented industries.
Purchasing power parity. A country cannot simply abandon the
gold standard and allow the value of its currency to fluctuate in
price as a result of day-to-day shifts in the supply of and demand
for its currency. In that event the money becomes the football of
domestic and international speculation. Its quoted price rises and
falls on the basis of wild and unconfirmed rumors; orderly international transactions become impossible. No one dares to conduct
regular business transactions in terms of a money of this sort.
The government must control the international value of its money
as it is allowed to seek the new equilibrium that will bring relief
from the pressure on its balance of payments. How is this level to
be determined, and how is the money to be controlled during the
transition to the new equilibrium position?
During the 1920s economists said that the new rate should be
fixed on the basis of purchasing power parities. Relative changes
in national price levels, as measured by some broadly based price
index, would give the answer. A numerical example will clarify the
concept.
Let us suppose that over a number of years prior to "going off
gold" country F had been able to meet its foreign obligations without a strain on its balance of payments. This was taken to mean
that its prices at that time were properly related to those of its
trading neighbors. These prices are then expressed as index numbers and given the value 100. At the time of devaluation prices
had risen by 5 percent in D, for example, and by 40 percent in F.
Rather than attempting to force its prices down, the government
of F decides to let its money seek its own level. At what level will
the franc tend to stabilize? The purchasing power formula gives
the answer:
/ u
u
• \ v (current D price index)
,
(old gold parity) X -7
^ r . r-3—r- = the correct rate
v
&
r
//
(current F price index)
i.e., the rate which represents the purchasing power of the franc.

352

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

By substituting values in the equation we get our answer. Since
the franc was worth 20 cents when the two countries were on the
gold standard, the formula reads as follows:
20 cents X ^ | = 15 cents
140
The franc will be stabilized at 15 cents.
Limitations of the formula. Unfortunately the answer cannot be
found as easily and as precisely as the purchasing power formula
would indicate. There is no price index that measures the changes
in the prices of just those goods that enter into international trade.
The formula, moreover, measures a past relationship, not current
relationships. At best, it provides a first approximation. The
proper rate is found by a process of trial and error in which primary
reliance must be placed upon changes in the Central Bank's holdings of foreign exchange.
At the outset of the transition period the government must fix
provisional rates of exchange with all of its trading partners and
defend these rates by offering to buy or sell foreign exchange at
the provisional rates. To be in a position to do this it must, as we
have seen, commandeer all of the foreign exchange in the possession
of banks, firms, and individuals located within the country, paying
for it in its own inconvertible money at the agreed rate. Thereafter, additional foreign exchange brought into existence by exports, by the receipt of interest on foreign loans, or by the
repayment of the principal of such loans, must similarly be sold to
the government (i.e., the Central Bank) at the provisional rates.
The government, through the Central Bank must at all times be in
sole possession of all the foreign exchange in existence. This foreign
exchange constitutes the totality of the claims of country F against
the assets of the countries against which the exchange is drawn.
The government is thus in a position to sell or to buy large quantities of the various foreign exchanges at the rates provisionally
established. Their prices are "pegged." No one will sell foreign
exchange at less than or buy it at more than the pegged rate, as
long as the government is able and willing to buy whatever quantities are offered, and to sell whatever quantities are demanded at
the "pegged" rate.
If the "pegged" rate is held above the purchasing power parity
rate (1 franc = 17* for example, when the real parity rate is 15*),
the Bank will find that the demand for foreign exchange at the
pegged prices exceeds the supply currently generated by exports.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

353

In that event the Bank will have to ration this foreign exchange,
or dispose of part of the exchange in its possession when the decision was made to abandon the gold standard. Evidently the provisional rates are not true, or equilibrium, rates. The test of a true
equilibrium rate is precisely this: that it shall neither build up unduly the Bank's foreign exchange holdings nor draw them down so
seriously as to make the pegged rate untenable. We shall discuss
presently the consequences of attempting to maintain rates that
are above the equilibrium level. Here we assume that the government establishes new and lower rates when confronted by a drain
on the Central Bank's foreign exchange holdings and that the process of adjustment is continued until the true equilibrium is reached.
Thereafter, the rates would be raised or lowered with a view to
maintaining the Central Bank's foreign exchange holdings at whatever level was regarded as necessary to weather short-run shifts in
the country's balance of payments with its trading neighbors. Increasing the official franc prices charged for dollar, pound, and
mark exchange would involve devaluation; reducing them would
involve appreciation. The theory of a managed currency implies
that the Central Bank will use either devaluation or appreciation
according to the changing requirements of international trade and
its own domestic program.
At the domestic level the aim will be to keep the national price
level stable on the basis of some broadly based price index. If the
population is growing and output is expanding, new money will
be introduced into circulation by the methods described in Chapter
23 under the Fourth Model system, thereby avoiding any fall in
the general level of prices. But unless all other countries adopt a
similar policy, and unless technological change proceeds at an
equal pace in these other countries, the domestic price level is
bound to get out of line with foreign price levels. Under the international gold standard, as we have seen, control of the national
price level was impossible. If prices rose above the levels prevailing abroad, the domestic price level had to be brought down; if
prices fell below the levels prevailing abroad, exports would increase, gold would flow into the country, and domestic prices would
rise. With a managed currency, exchange rate fluctuations take
the place of price level fluctuations.
The prerequisites for success. So far as a single country is concerned, the case for a managed currency completely divorced from
gold, convertible freely into other currencies and yet allowed to
seek constantly its "purchasing power parity," is very persuasive.

354

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

Yet even here a number of conditions must be satisfied. As stated
at the outset of this chapter, we shall discuss the conditions, first
on the assumption that there was considerable unemployment, and
then on the assumption that there was very little unemployment
at the time the decision was made to abandon gold.
The case of a country with considerable unemployment. The first
condition for success is that the bids by the profitable export industries for additional resources shall not drive up money costs and
hence prices so high as to destroy the advantage of devaluation.
Factoral costs represent incomes to their owners. Unless they can
be held down, too little of the national output will be available for
export, which is one of the purposes of devaluation. That they will
be held down cannot be taken for granted since the original difficulty was due to the inability of the government to keep money
costs, particularly wages, competitive with those in other countries.
The success of the experiment, therefore, will depend primarily
upon the behavior of money wages. They must not rise as much as
prices. This is the first prerequisite. It may not be difficult to satisfy this condition if there was considerable unemployment at the
time the country went off gold. Until quite recently that was almost always the case, and it is our view that this must be the situation if devaluation is to solve a country's balance of payments
difficulties. Devaluation, as we have seen, will increase the profit
margins of the export-oriented industries. They will bid for additional labor. Until the pool of idle labor nears exhaustion, they
may be able to get all the workers they need without bringing about
a general rise in money wages. The wage component in the national income will increase because more workers are employed.
Increased wage disbursements will result in an increased money
demand for the products of the domestically oriented industries.
Thus both sectors of the economy will feel the stimulus of the increased foreign demand. Under these circumstances the recovery
may go forward very rapidly and with little if any upward pressure
on the price level. Even if money wages should stiffen somewhat
the economies resulting from fuller utilization of plant may actually
lower unit costs of production. Increased employment and increased output may thus make possible increased exports, increased
domestic consumption, and even increased imports.
A second prerequisite for the success of devaluation is that it shall
not provoke retaliation by foreign governments. In the case of a
small country this condition may very well be satisfied simply because the devaluing country's exports are too small to give rise to

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

355

a successful demand for protection against what firms in other
countries may regard as unfair competition. The prospects for success are very much less, however, in the case of a large country
whose exports and imports represent an important part of world
trade.
The British abandonment of the gold standard in 1931 forced practically
every other country off gold. We went off for a short time in 1933 and
when we returned it was with a dollar with a smaller gold content, and
only for the purpose of international trade. Devaluation thus failed to
give Britain the price advantage in international markets that she would
have enjoyed had her neighbors remained on the gold standard on the
old terms. Again in 1949 the British Government undertook to relieve the
pressure on her foreign exchange balances by reducing the value of
the pound from $4.03 to $2.80 and again most countries promptly followed suit.
History is replete with cases of successful devaluation by single
countries, especially small ones. Indeed, until quite recently, devaluations were almost universally invoked as a means of restoring
domestic employment. And it was the success of these experiments
that led many economists to the conclusion that international price
adjustments via devaluations and appreciations were superior in all
cases to adjustments via deflation and inflation. But since World
War II something new has been added. Public opinion is now demanding and governments are accepting responsibility for the maintenance of full employment. Consequently we have had in recent
years numerous devaluations undertaken for the purpose of correcting so-called "fundamental disequalibria" in national balances
of payments by countries in which unemployment was conspicuous
by its absence. The British devaluation of 1949 is an example of
a full employment devaluation.
Devaluation under conditions of full employment. The first prerequisite for success here, as in the previous case, is that wage
increases shall not wipe out the advantage of devaluation. But in
this case success is much more doubtful, particularly in a country
in which labor is strongly organized and the government is formally committed to maintain full employment.
The first effect of devaluation, as before, is to increase the profits
of export industries. But now they can expand only by taking
workers away from other jobs. This means that there must be a
considerable rise of wages in the export-oriented industries, if these
firms are to get additional labor. If wages as a whole are not to
rise, there would have to be a fall in money wages in the domes-

356

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

tically oriented industries and in the public services. But one of
the principal reasons for devaluation is to render unnecessary any
fall in money wages in any sector of the economy; or, more precisely, devaluation is recommended because of the assumption that
money wages will not fall in any sector of the economy. A sharp
restriction of bank credit and increased taxes on wage incomes
might prevent the increases in wages from driving up prices. But
credit restrictions via an increase in the Central Bank's discount
rate is a gold standard method of adaptation and is rejected by
advocates of devaluation. They favor the maintenance of a low
interest rate as a means of encouraging business expansion.
It follows, therefore, that devaluation, unless accompanied by
permanent wage and price controls (and these are incompatible
with the minimum requirements of a predominantly private enterprise economy), will necessarily be followed by a rise in the price
level of the devaluing country. Including the considerations already advanced, there are three reasons for this, (a) The higher
prices paid for foreign exchange leads to a rise in the prices of all
imported goods, (b) The increase in exports reduces the supply
of goods available for domestic consumption, (c) The increased
money incomes flowing to factor owners leads to a bidding up of
commodity prices and services.
This rise in prices reduces but need not wipe out entirely the advantages of devaluation. What is important is that the rise should
leave the price level below those in the gold standard countries.
A 30 percent devaluation followed by a 15 percent rise in domestic
prices would leave the devaluing country in a sound competitive
position. The program would have succeeded because some factor
owners failed to get a 15 percent upward adjustment in their money
claims. The curtailment of consumption forced upon them would
release goods for export.
When the gold standard-deflation adjustment route is followed,
the costs of adjustment fall primarily on profit makers and wage
earners. Bond and mortgage holders, persons living on pensions and
annuities, the white collar and otherfixed-incomegroups are spared.
Indeed their real incomes rise. When the devaluation route is followed, profits are spared. The fixed-income groups are forced to
shoulder the main costs of the adjustment. But since the portion
of the national income going to thefixed-incomegroups is relatively
small, a portion of the burden has to fall on wage earners in the
form of a lag of wages behind prices. Yet if money wages do not
keep up with the cost of living, when the profits of industry gen-

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

357

erally are holding up, and the profits of the export industries are
soaring, it is difficult for labor leaders to explain to their followers
why they should have to take a cut in their real incomes in order
to re-establish the country's international competitive position. And
with the "full employment" that devaluation is supposed to make
possible, it will be difficult, if not impossible to prevent them from
demanding round after round of wage increases in a futile effort to
keep up with commodity prices, which are necessarily driven higher
by each successive round of wage increases.
These are some of the reasons why recent national devaluations
have so often ended in disastrous runaway inflation.
UNIVERSAL CURRENCY MANAGEMENT

So far we have considered the possibility of a completely managed currency in an isolated state, and in a single state in a world
of independent nations in which all the others are on the gold
standard.
A recapitulation. We found that a completely isolated state could
operate with a managed currency and could enjoy the advantages
of long-run price stability without the need of any tie-in of its
money with gold. The money of account would be based upon the
public debt, i.e., the public credit. The debt would be increased
or decreased according to the changing needs of trade, but over
time the debt would grow in order to provide the volume of money
needed to handle the secular growth of population and of per capita output. We expressed doubts, however, regarding the wisdom
of entrusting this difficult task to any government in this world of
imperfect men and imperfect institutions.
Then, in the preceding section of this chapter, we considered the
possibility of a single state operating with a managed currency in
an otherwise gold standard world and we found that the proposal
is entirely feasible, although the advantages are not as great as is
popularly supposed. If the single country with its managed currency is to avoid the evils of secular inflation, labor and capital will
have to be shifted back and forth between its export-oriented industries and its domestically oriented industries in much the same
way as in countries operating under the disciplines of the international gold standard.
We now want to know whether all countries could simultaneously operate with managed currencies.
In the realm of pure theory it is possible to set up an international model in which all-powerful and all-wise governments

358

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

manage their several national currencies along the lines described
earlier. Each government enjoys the complete confidence of its
own people and of the peoples in other countries. Flights of capital are unknown. Devaluations and appreciations of the several
currencies take place at the proper time and to the precise extent
needed to maintain healthy and fair international competition.
Each country, emancipated from the interdependence of national
price levels imposed by the rules of the gold standard, is free to
adopt the long-run domestic price policy that seems to it best. The
one decides to pass on to all its people, as consumers, the fruits of
technological progress in the form of secularly falling commodity
and service prices and long-run stability of factoral prices; another
elects to operate with slowly rising commodity and service prices,
passing on the gains of technological progress in the form of a
more rapid rise of factoral prices; a third prefers the intermediate
solution: secularly stable prices for consumer goods and services
and a slow rise of factoral prices.
The theory of universal currency management is very attractive,
but we are not likely to see it realized in the near future. The
essential element of confidence is simply not there. People everywhere either will look to gold or, failing that, will come to regard
one among the national moneys as most deserving of their trust.
In the 19th century and up to World War I the pound sterling
was the international money of account. Since it was defined in
terms of gold and redeemable in gold, it, in effect, provided the international gold standard long before the other nations formally
defined their own moneys in gold. Private banks everywhere
treated their holdings of pound sterling exchange as equivalent
to gold and regarded their gains and losses of sterling exchange as
equivalent to gains and losses of gold. At the present time the
dollar plays the role that the pound formerly played. It provides
the yardstick for comparing the relative values of all the other
national moneys. Without such a common yardstick it seems safe
to say that international trading would be conducted almost entirely on the basis of international barter agreements, with all the
disadvantages that barter involves.
Freely fluctuating national currencies are objectionable on another
score. They create a serious barrier to long-term international private investments. Such investments are always regarded as more
risky than domestic investments. Uncertainty regarding future rates
of exchange increases the risks and hence the costs of securing capital from abroad. Countries that need foreign capital can least af-

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

359

ford the freedom which comes from divorcing their moneys from
gold, yet, paradoxically, it is precisely in these countries that the
managed currency doctrine enjoys the greatest vogue.
Devaluation and the "beggar-thy-neighbor" charge.

As was

pointed out earlier in this chapter, the claim is made that the international gold standard forced countries to pursue a "beggarthy-neighbor" policy whenever their economies failed to operate
satisfactorily. They were accused of trying to cure unemployment
at home by exporting it, i.e., by flooding foreign countries with lowpriced commodities and by cutting down imports. But the same
charge can also be made, a fortiore, against devaluation.
(1) In the first place, devaluation also stimulates exports and
discourages imports. The impact of devaluation upon foreign producers is likely to be even more general, abrupt, and hence disruptive than that of deflation because it lowers by an equal amount
the prices at which all exportable commodities can be profitably
sold abroad, even though the prices of some of them are still highly
competitive. Deflation, on the other hand, takes place slowly, irregularly, and by small steps. Prices fall first in one sector of the
economy and then in another. Adjustments abroad to deflation
would thus appear to be easier than to devaluation.
(2) In the second place, devaluation reduces the devaluing
country's buying power in foreign markets more drastically than is
the case under deflation. Literally overnight, the prices of all foreign goods are made higher to buyers in the devaluing country.
Consequently the impact upon foreign export firms is again more
immediate and more disruptive than under deflation.
(3) A third reason why devaluation is more likely to lead to
international resentments than deflation is that it is more likely to
be overdone. The purchasing power parity formula provides only
a very rough guide as to the devaluation required to stop the loss
of gold. Having decided upon devaluation, the government is likely
to fix a rate which it is quite sure it will be able to defend, so as
to avoid the shock to confidence that repeated devaluations always
provoke. The temptation is tofixon a rate well below the true equilibrium rate. This gives the country a competitive advantage that
can be very disturbing to the economies of other countries.
The French devaluation of 1926 made the price of French export commodities very low in foreign markets and led to a substantial rise in exports and a considerable movement of gold to France. Britain's employment difficulties in the latter half of that decade appear to have been due
as much to the devaluation rate selected by the French government, as to

360

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

the decision of the British government to bring the pound sterling back
to its historic parity with the dollar at the rate of $4.86. This was the
judgment of Dr. Walter Stewart, American Advisor to the Bank of England, 2as given in his oral testimony before the Macmillan Committee in
1930.
When the deflation route is followed, export prices are not likely
to fall any more than is absolutely necessary to make them competitive in world markets and the changes come gradually. Moreover, foreign assistance tends to come sooner and in the particularly
valuable form of capital investments. Thus, after security prices
have fallen and downward cost adjustments have been made, profit
margins reappear and stock prices rise as abruptly as they fell. International investors are alert for just such opportunities and will
take advantage of them, if they are confident that the link between
the country's money and gold is solid. The resulting influx of foreign funds reduces the pressure on the country's gold reserves and
at the same time provides resources urgently needed to finance the
readaptation of the national economy to the changed requirements
of international specialization and international trade.
The "beggar-thy-neighbor" charge levied at the international
gold standard is thus grossly exaggerated. Devaluation, no less than
deflation, leads to an increase in exports and a decrease in imports.
Both methods make the maintenance of full employment in other
countries more difficult; both require adaptations at home and
abroad. On balance, the adaptations called for by the rules of the
gold standard are less arbitrary, more impersonal, less political, and
less disruptive of international trade and international good will
than the adaptations brought about by devaluation. Historically,
the international gold standard appears to have contributed to the
health and vigor of the private enterprise system. Whether the system can survive the destruction of the gold standard remains an
open question. It is true that a government cannot remain on the
gold standard if it is unable to keep its economy competitive, flexible, and adaptable. But it is also true that devaluation will not
solve the problems confronting such a government. On the other
hand, any government that can preserve a workable capitalism can
operate under the disciplines of the gold standard. Our own view,
2
See Monetary Policy and Economic Progress: Testimony of Dr. W. W. Stewart
before the Macmillan Committee July 3-4, 1930 (No. 443 in the series "National Economic Problems," published by The American Enterprise Association, New York,
1950). In the light of subsequent development the interchanges between Dr. Stewart
and J. M. Keynes, a member of the Committee, are of great theoretical interest.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

361

therefore, is that, until something better has been found, the reestablishment of an international gold standard should be favored
by all those who wish to preserve and improve the private enterprise system.
THE CONSEQUENCE OF INADEQUATE DEVALUATION
This adverse judgment on devaluation as a national way of life
does not deny the necessity of a redefinition of national moneys in
terms of gold after some great calamity like a modern war. Suppose, for example, that at the end of a great war the price levels of
our four-country world, D, F, P, and M, showed the following
changes:
Country
D
F
P
M

Pre-war price level
100
100
100
100

Post-war price level
200
300
500
1,000

Under such circumstances it would be unwise to urge that the governments of F, P, and M should return to the gold standard at the
old parities with the money of country D—the dollar. The reestablishment of the pre-war parities would require such a sudden
and drastic reduction in prices in P and M, and also in F, as to
provoke widespread bankruptcies, massive unemployment, and unnecessary suffering. No popular government could survive the
ordeal. The thing to do under the circumstances is for the four
countries to redefine the gold contents of their moneys, by agreement if possible, with the aid of the purchasing power formula, as
described previously.3
With this kind of emergency devaluation we have no disagreement. What we have questioned is the claim that a country can
insulate its domestic price level from the inflationary and deflationary forces coming from abroad by the type of currency management
described in this chapter, and still contribute to the rebuilding of
a prosperous, interdependent, and peaceful world economy. What
we would urge is that governments should regard the gold standard as most of us regard marriage, i.e., as a durable contract, not
lightly to be entered into and not lightly to be broken.
But once having decided upon devaluation, the devaluation
should be sufficient to bring domestic prices down to the level pre3 See p. 351.

362

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

vailing elsewhere. Otherwise the drain on the country's foreign
balances will continue. In one fashion or another, the value of imports must be reduced to the value of the foreign exchange currently being earned by exports. If a country persists in defending
an impossibly high rate of exchange, it must impose quantitative
restrictions on imports and exercise close control of exports.4
In the case of imports the usual procedure is to restrict them to
some fraction of those of an earlier period which is taken to represent normal conditions. National quotas have to be assigned to the
importing countries. What formula shall be adopted for assigning
quotas? The solution least likely to give international offense is to
base the quotas on the performance of the earlier period. If country
D supplied to country F, for example, one-third of commodity X
during the base period it cannot complain if it gets one-third of the
reduced amount now allowed to enter. Nor has the government of
country M any legal basis for a complaint if its firms get their proportionate share of the quota, even though, in the meantime, these
firms have succeeded in getting their costs and their prices below
those of the firms in country D. From the diplomatic point of view
the allocation has been nondiscriminatory, and hence "correct."
Economically, however, the solution is far from "correct." Consumers in F are no longer allowed to buy in the cheapest market,
and firms in country D have been favored at the expense of firms in
country M. The price mechanism as an allocative device has been
made inoperative.
No less vexing is the problem of deciding what firms shall be
allowed to handle the quotas. Again the solution is likely to be to
divide the quota among the old-established import firms on the
basis of their shares of the imports of the base period. Thus old
firms are protected against new firms; competition is destroyed,
monopoly is promoted, and corruption is invited. A quota is now a
very valuable privilege. It virtually guarantees a handsome and
relatively riskless profit to its fortunate possessor. Businessmen can
afford to show their gratitude in a handsome way to any official
who is in a position to increase or decrease their quotas.
Nor can the government disinterest itself in the export trade.
Exporters must be carefully supervised, lest part of the exchange
4

A country which has long insulated itself from international competition by
"pegged" exchange rates and quantitative controls on imports and exports may find
it desirable to return to the gold standard only after a transitional period during
which it maintains the complete convertibility of its money with all other convertible
currencies but allows the rate to fluctuate freely in response to changes in the supply
of and the demand for its currency in the foreign exchange markets.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

363

they earn go into foreign hiding. Exports may also have to be
directed toward certain countries, despite the fact that higher prices
prevail elsewhere, in order to secure the foreign exchange needed
to pay for essential imports. Consequently trade becomes bilateral
instead of multilateral, and proceeds increasingly on the basis of
short-term political arrangements in which government is pitted
against government. Since the domestic market is more profitable
than the foreign market, it is necessary to impose export quotas on
firms capable of producing for either market.
The invisible items in the balance of payments must also be
brought under control. Pleasure trips abroad have to be stopped or
sharply curtailed since they use up part of the precious foreign
exchange needed to cover essential imports. Men of means can no
longer place their savings where they will bring the highest rate of
return, if that means placing them outside the country. In brief,
the attempt to maintain an artificially high rate of exchange and a
stable domestic price level forces a government into a type of total
planning that is entirely inconsistent with the operating requirements of a private enterprise system.
IS THE UNITED STATES ON THE GOLD STANDARD?
The United States dollar now provides the world with its international monetary standard. It does so in part because of the large
role that our exports, imports, foreign investments, and foreign gifts
play in international economic affairs. But it does so still more because, with the exception of a very short period in 1933, the United
States has been on the gold standard, so far as foreign countries are
concerned. It is true that we reduced the gold content of the dollar
in 1934, but foreigners with valid claims to dollars can take them in
the form of gold, if they so desire. This is the acid test from the
international point of view. As long as foreigners can collect their
dollar claims in gold at the rate of 15 5/21 grains per dollar, the
world is in possession of a common measure of value.
From the point of view of persons resident in the United States
it is by no means so clear that we are on the gold standard. Certainly we are not on it in the original meaning of the term, which
included the right of an individual to buy unlimited quantities of
gold from the Treasury at the mint price and to dispose of it as he
saw fit. This right was withdrawn by the Executive Order of April
5, 1933. All that a resident of the United States can do is convert
assets into legal tender money which is redeemable by the Treasury in legal tender money.

364

BANKING AND MONETARY CIRCUIT

The revolt against the gold standard is an outgrowth of the Great
Depression of the 1930s and of the experience of World War I
when national economies, divorced from gold and stimulated by
enormous government spendings, were able to provide continuous
employment for all able and willing workers. These two experiences also led to a revolt against the traditional view that market
forces tend to keep a competitive private enterprise economy operating at the full employment level. Many economists now hold that
government and only government can keep a private enterprise
economy operating at this level. For some years past, and under the
intellectual leadership of an eminent British economist, the late
Lord Keynes, they have been busy working out a theory to support
their position. It has come to be known as the theory of effective
demand. Its implementation requires an accurate and up-to-date
measurement of the national income and of some of its critical components. The government is supposed to be able to manipulate
these components in such a fashion as to produce continuous full
employment and expanding world trade.
Questions:
1. "The international gold standard forces a country with a deficit in
its balance of payments to correct the situation by adjustments that
hurt its trading partners. This 'beggar-thy-neighbor' solution can be
avoided by abandoning the gold standard/'
(a) Develop the supporting argument.
(b) Identify the conditions that must be present in a country abandoning gold if it alone decides to abandon gold. Are these conditions
more or less easily realized if the country is in a serious depression
or experiencing a boom at the time it goes off gold?
(c) In what respects does the distribution of the burden of adjustment among social groups differ from that required under the rules
of the international gold standard?
(d) Present the arguments for and against the thesis that "going off
gold" enables a country to eliminate the deficit in its balance of payments in a way that is less harmful to the interests of its trading partners than the method required by the rules of the international gold
standard.
(e) Discuss critically the meaning of the term "deficit in its balance
of payments" as it appears in the preceding statement. What assumptions are necessary to make the phrase meaningful?
(f) Distinguish between "going off gold" with the intention of return*
to gold at a more appropriate rate and going off gold with the intention of allowing the national money continuously to seek its own level.

REVOLT AGAINST THE GOLD STANDARD

365

(g) Assuming that the government intends to return to gold but at
a new and more appropriate rate, how is the government to determine what this new rate should be?
2. "There is an inherent contradiction between exchange rate stability
with freely convertible currencies and domestic price level stability.
A country which wishes to continue to enjoy the benefits of international trade can have one or the other, but not both."
Argue for or against the correctness of this statement. If you regard
it as correct, indicate, with supporting reasons, which of the two
solutions appears to be more consistent with the operating requirements of the private enterprise system.
3. Discuss critically the advantages and the disadvantages of a world
trading system in which all nations prohibit exports of gold yet undertake to maintain the complete convertibility of their currencies.
4. Argue for or against the correctness of the following thesis: Exchange
stability that has to be defended by elaborate controls of domestic
prices and by quotas on imports and exports is more damaging to
international trade than a regime of convertible but freely fluctuating
exchange rates.
5. To what extent does the present United States monetary system depart from the requirements of a 100 percent gold standard system?

II. The Market Economy
PROBLEMS AND POLICIES

PART FIVE

Business Fluctuations

27
Facts and Theories Identified

W E HAVE almost completed our
account of the way in which an enterprise system behaves, but not
quite. So far it has been taken for granted that the economy operates at what has come to be called "the full employment level."
Transitional unemployment was recognized, but it was assumed
to be the result of changes in consumer demand or of technological developments at home or abroad. It was taken for granted that
such unemployment would last only so long as was necessary to get
resources redistributed among firms in accordance with the requirements of the new situation. Since changes would be more or less
continuous, it was recognized that this type of unemployment
would always be present. But it would involve different people at
different times and hence, for any one person, would not be of long
duration, unless indeed that person held out for an uneconomically
high wage. Such unemployment would be voluntary, and hence
not a matter with which government should be concerned. Say's
Law was regarded as adequate proof that there could be no such
thing as massive and long-continued involuntary unemployment.
It was also recognized that seasonal forces would cause some
involuntary unemployment. Building activities tend to be concentrated in the warmer months of the year. The planting and harvesting of crops cause seasonal fluctuations in the demand for labor.
The heavy spending around the Christmas season has a similar
effect. It was assumed that market forces would produce higher
wages in seasonal employment than in regular employment, so that
again there was nothing in this situation to justify a governmental
intervention.
Thus, in fact, the only kind of involuntary unemployment that
was recognized was transitional or frictional in nature, and it was
369

370

372

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

assumed to be constantly in the process of disappearing. The concept of "full employment" with which we shall be concerned
throughout the rest of this book also recognizes the inevitability
of some seasonal and frictional unemployment. There have been
extended periods in the past, however, during which all of the unemployment could not be explained as simply "frictional." The number of unemployed workers and the duration of their unemployment
were both on such a scale as to preclude a "frictional" explanation.
This type of large-scale unemployment has been associated with
the depression phase of what has come to be known as the business
cycle.
Cycles in the United States. The term "business cycle" is used to
describe alternations of good and bad times. These alternations have
characterized the performance of private enterprise economies
throughout the period for which we have adequate statistical information. Figure 27-1 shows the record of business activity in the
United States since 1790. The following tabulation shows the number of depression months for the period 1819 to 1938. It will be
noted that there have been fifteen periods of more or less severe
depression in this span of roughly 120 years.
DEPRESSION PERIODS IN THE UNITED STATES, 1819-1938 1

1819-21 1825-26 1833-34 1837-43 1857-58 1866-67 1873-78 1882-85 -

24 months
12 months
9 months
72 months
18 months
18 months
66 months
36 months

1890-91 1893-97 1907-08 1913-14 1920-21 . 1929-33 1937-38 -

9 months
48 months
12 months
20 months
18 months
42 months
10 months

The really severe depressions were those which began in 1837,
1873, 1882, 1893, and 1929; they lasted on the average just over
50 months. The average duration of the other depressions was
only 16 months. Even in the so-called good years there were idle
plants and idle men.
Later in this chapter and more particularly in the two following
ones we shall examine various explanations for this behavior of
private enterprise systems. But first we need to have before us a
generalized picture of a business cycle.
1
Harold G. Moulton, Controlling Factors in Economic Development, The Brookings
Institution, Washington: 1949, p. 40.

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

373

A GENERALIZED PICTURE OF A BUSINESS CYCLE

Following Professor Haberler's terminology in the study which
he made for the old League of Nations,2 we shall describe the cycle
as possessing four phases: an expansion phase, an upper turning
point, a contraction phase and a lower turning point. Diagrammatically a cycle may be represented as a wavy line such as that
shown in Fig. 27-2. The duration of a cycle may be measured from
Upper turning points

Lower turning points

FIG. 27-2

one lower turning point to the next, or from one upper turning
point to the next upper turning point. Cycle theory works from
general models. It should always be remembered, however, that
each cycle is unique and that its precise causes can be determined
only after the event and by careful historical research. The depression which reached its low point in 1932 and has come to be known
as The Great Depression is not to be regarded as typical. We shall
deal with the causes of this depression at various points in this
book, particularly in Chapter 38. It took many insensate acts of
many governments to bring it on and to make it last so long. Only
if private enterprise can be shown to be responsible for wars can
The Great Depression be laid at its door.3
Historical research reveals, nonetheless, the existence of certain
features common to all cycles in their various phases. It is from
these common features that theorists attempt to derive their explanations of the recurrence of good and bad times, and their
proposals for the reduction or elimination of irregularities in employment and production.
2
Gottfried von Haberler, Prosperity and Depression, A Theoretical Analysis of
Cyclical Movements, League of Nations, Geneva: 1937. This study was made at the
request of the League of Nations. The Columbia University Press has issued the subsequent English editions. It has been translated into many languages. It reviewed the
principle cycle theories and developed one which may be regarded as a synthesis of
much of the best thinking on the problem up to the date of publication.
3
This issue is discussed in Chapter 38, pp. 549-550.

374

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

The situation at the lower turning point. We could begin our

account of the characteristic features of the phases of the theorists'
model cycle at any point. There are advantages, however, in starting at the point where the forces of contraction have spent themselves, i.e., at the lower turning point.
The situation at the lower turning point is such that any favorable development can very easily bring about a rapid recovery.
Commodity prices and factor prices are both low in comparison
with those prevailing at the preceding upper turning point, but
they have held steady for some time. The managers of business
firms realize that costs have reached bottom. There is no further
advantage to be gained by waiting for still lower prices. Many
firms will have highly liquid assets, and almost all will have at
least limited lines of unused credit with their banks. Inventories
are low. Some maintenance and replacement expenditures can no
longer be put off. Many householders are in the same position.
Their incomes have become stabilized, and their stocks of clothing,
household effects and furnishings badly need replenishing. The repairs and operating costs of the family car make a new car look like
a bargain. Once it is clear that consumer goods prices are not going to fall any further, spending is bound to pick up.
The acceleration principle. Thus from the side of firms and householders increased orders start the wheels of industry turning at a
quicker pace. At this point a force begins to operate which has
come to be known as the acceleration principle. This principle
states that any change in the demand for consumer goods tends
to be magnified as it passes back to firms that supply those directly
serving the final consumer.
The principle is based on the known fact that business firms
keep their inventories in a rough relationship with their rates of
sale. In the example which follows, the normal relationship is
taken to be twice the monthly rate of sales.
The assumption here is that the revival begins at the end of the
first month. For several months previously, sales have been running at the rate of 1,000 pairs of shoes per month. The Company
order for shoes has been 1,000 pairs a month from its wholesale
suppliers. During the second month 25 percent more shoes are
sold. The end of the month inventory is down to 750. The Company places an order for 1,750 pairs of shoes to bring its inventory
up to the higher level appropriate to the improved business situation. The wholesaler thus experiences a 75 percent increase in
orders as the result of a 25 percent increase in final consumer buy-

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

375

MONTHLY SHOE ORDERS OF THE STANDARD SHOE COMPANY

Period
(mo.)
(1)

Monthly
Sales
(2)

Normal
Inventory
(3)

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th

1,000
1,250
1,750
2,275
2,500
2,000

2,000
2,500
3,500
4,500
5,000
4,000

Percentage
(3)—(4)
Increase in
Required
End-of
Inventory
Month Replacement
Inventory
Orders
Sales Orders
(5)
(6)
(4)
(7)
1,000
750
750
1,225
2,000
3,000

1,000
1,750
2,750
3,275
3,000
1,000

25
40
30
10
-20

75
57
19
-8
-67

ing. It is to be noted that the percentage increase in the orders
flowing to wholesalers does not exceed the increase in the retailer's
sales to consumers throughout all of the periods under review. The
approximately 10 percent increase in sales during the 5th period
results in a roughly equivalent decline in orders to wholesalers. The
20 percent decline in the 6th period cuts reorders by two-thirds.
If shoe stores generally are experiencing increased sales comparable to those of the Standard Shoe Company, the magnification
of demand at the wholesale level will be tremendous. The wholesaler was selling 1,000,000 pairs of shoes a month in the 1st period
on the basis of 2,000,000 inventory. He sells in the second
month 1,500,000 shoes and sends back to the shoe factories at the
end of the month an order for 2,500,000 shoes, a 66% percent increase. Within a short time, pressure is on the shoe manufacturers.
With excess capacity and plenty of unemployed but qualified workers, the factories can respond for a time without placing orders
for new machines and increased physical plant. But as their backlogs of unfilled orders pile up, they will place orders with the firms
making shoe machinery and with the building construction industry. Again there is a magnification effect. A shoe-machinery firm
with its output geared only to replacement orders now finds itself
confronted with orders for equipment to expand operations. These
new orders may result in a three to fourfold increase in its rate of
sales. This new situation will force the manufacturer of shoe machinery to place "rush" orders with the machine tool industry. The
building industries will place orders for trucks, dirt-moving apparatus, structural steel and the thousand and one materials that go into

376

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

modern factories. Because of the magnification or acceleration effect, even a small increase in the demand for shoes can induce spectacular increases in the demands for shoe machinery, machine tools,
and construction equipment.
It is thus apparent that changes in consumer demand get passed
back through the long lines of production with increasing violence.
When the economy is operating at the time at the full employment
level, the perpetual small shifts in consumer demand impose disproportionate adjustments on the suppliers of the consumer goods
industries. An economy would have to be extremely flexible to
meet these adjustments without any fractional unemployment. This
is why most economists hold that a free and undirected economy
cannot operate effectively without the flexibility that is provided
by a moderate volume of unemployed labor. This is hard on those
who are unemployed at a given time, but it appears to be part of the
price that a people have to pay if they want progress, and the
change that goes with it, and if they want to maintain a private
enterprise system. We shall come back to this issue in our discussions of the possibility of full employment in a free society and
also in our discussion of the role of social security in such a society.
The multiplier principle. Increased spending by business firms,
whether for inventory, plant maintenance, or new building, can also
start an economy on the expansion phase of the cycle. At the bottom of a depression such additional spending comes from one of
two sources: idle funds of individuals or business firms or from
bank loans. In either case it represents an increase in the money
demand for resources. The owners of these resources will have
more money. They may set aside part or use it to repay old debts,
but a good part of it will be spent in consumer goods markets.4
It may be this new investment spending that started the accelerator working. Or it may have been the accelerator that tripped
off the multiplier. In any event the two tend to reinforce one another.
The accelerator is likely to be a bit slow in making its full influence felt because of the abundance of idle plant capacity in the
system. It cannot induce investment in additional plant capacity
until the physical slack has been taken up. Thereafter it works back
into the capital goods sector of the economy and trips the multiplier "trigger," unless some outside development has already started
an expansion in that sector. Once these two forces have been released the revival rapidly gathers momentum.
4

The effect of saving on the multiplier is discussed in the next chapter.

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

377

A further factor that propels the economy forward is the abrupt
and dramatic shift from losses to profits. This is particularly pronounced in the early stages of the expansion phase. The slack in
the system during this early period permits firms to meet increasing orders by buying more supplies, hiring more labor, and bringing idle facilities back into use. Total variable costs rise, but
average variable costs may actually fall; in any event, average
fixed costs tend to fall rapidly.
Psychological forces now begin to make themselves felt. The pessimism of the contraction period gives way first to a cautious
optimism and then to a buoyant confidence. The fever is contagious.
More and more businessmen begin to project the growth trends of
the recent past into the future and to place orders on that assumption.
Declining rate of expansion. The early rate of growth cannot be
maintained. The closer the economy approaches to the full employment level the closer does the overall rate of growth come to
depend on the rate of increase in the labor force and on the rate of
technological progress. The number of new workers entering the
labor force depends upon the current death and retirement rates
and the birth rate some 18 to 20 years earlier. Technological progress may be fairly rapid throughout most of the recovery phase of
the cycle. The historical record shows that a great deal of research
is devoted to ways and means of cutting costs during the contraction phase of the cycle. The results of much of this research tend
to get incorporated into the economic system during the phase here
under consideration. But by the time the top of the cycle has been
reached the rate of growth will be disappointingly slow by comparison with the rate during the early phases of the recovery.
Given this fact, can a contraction be avoided? This is the problem
to which most theories (explanations) of the business cycle address
themselves. Here we are merely concerned with a generalized
description of the developments during the expansion and contraction phases of the cycle and the situations at the upper and lower
turning points.
Before leaving the expansion phase two further observations are
called for. The first has to do with changes in the "production-mix"
that occur during the recovery; the second with the behavior of the
money supply under a fractional reserve banking system.
Changes in the production-mix. At any given time the employed
resources of an economy are divided between providing goods and
services for direct consumption and goods and services for main-

378

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

taining and expanding the capital goods which are used for producing consumer goods. Speaking very roughly and very generally
we can say that the services of labor and the products of the extractive industries are purchased by either the consumer goods industries or the capital goods industries. (In this connection the
activities of the State and its political subdivisions fall into one of
the two categories according as the public services benefit consumers directly or provide them with durable things like roads, school
houses, public buildings, etc., which will yield their services primarily in the future.)
At the lower turning point the employed resources are concentrated relatively heavily in the consumer sector of the economy. As
the recovery proceeds both sectors expand but the expansion is
relatively greater in the capital goods sector than in the consumer
goods sector. Figure 27-3(a) gives a visual picture of the situation
20%

68%

12%

10%

73%

(a)
H
[

=

(b)

17%

2%

75%

23%

(c)

U, or Unemployment Sector

I = C, or Consumer Goods Sector

\M\ = I, or Capital Goods Sector

FIG. 27-3

at the lower turning point. The next two diagrams (b and c) show
the changes that occur during the recovery period. The significant
thing to note is the change in the proportions in which resources
are to be found in the idle or U sector, in the consumer goods or C
sector, and in the capital goods or I sector.
At the lower turning point 20 percent of the resources (which,
for convenience, can be thought of here as persons able and willing
to work) are assumed to be unemployed: the remaining 80 percent
are employed in the consumer and the capital goods sectors of the
economy. The proportions at the low point of the cycle are 20
percent idle, 68 percent serving consumers, and only 12 percent
engaged in the maintenance and expansion of the existing equipment. At the midpoint of the expansion the "idle sector" is down
by one-half, to 10 percent, the consumer sector accounts for 73
percent, and the capital goods sector 17 percent. At the top of the

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

379

cycle the idle sector is down to 2 percent, a frictional minimum,
and the consumer sector is up 2 percentage points. The big expansion has occurred in the capital goods sector. It has gained 6
percentage points.
We shall come back to this problem of proportionality or production-mix in our search for the causes of and possible means of controlling the cycle. Our concern here is merely with the fact that
the production-mix is changing continuously as the economy moves
from under-employment to full employment.
The behavior of the money supply during expansion. An essential
feature of the expansion is the increase in the volume of money
transactions. More goods and services are being produced in exchange for money payments. If the banking system were based on
our 100 percent gold reserve model, the increase in the velocity
of circulation of money would have to be very great indeed to support the large increase in transactions characteristic of the expansion. In fact, however, the banking systems of all the great trading
and industrial countries extend credits on the basis of fractional
reserves. It is this fact that is responsible for another characteristic
feature of the expansion: it goes forward at slowly rising prices.
The M V in the equation of exchange MV + M Y = PT increases
fast enough to make this possible.
What happens is this: Firms and householders ask for bank loans
to finance the replenishment of their stocks. The banks with large
excess reserves and hence with low earnings are able and indeed
anxious to make advances whenever the security behind the loans
seems adequate. These bank loans represent credit creation. As
long as most of the banks simultaneously extend credit, there is
little or no drain on their legal reserves. All that happens is that
their reserves slowly approach the minimum limit set by law or by
custom. A further limiting factor under the international gold
standard is the loss of gold which occurs if the expansion of credit
raises the price level above the levels prevailing abroad.
We shall return to this aspect of the problem later. All that concerns us here is the fact that under fractional reserve banking a
recovery can go forward for some time with slowly rising prices.
The competition of idle resources prevents these price rises from
getting passed on in the form of higher factoral rewards, i.e., higher
costs. Hence rising money demands get reflected in rapidly widening profit margins, and profit margins provide the single most
important signal for business managers.
So much for the expansion phase of the cycle. It must come tsp

380

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

an end when the economy reaches the full employment level. Will
this prove to be a plateau or merely a turning point? Historically
it has always proved to be a turning point. Our purpose here is to
identify the forces at play that will tend to cause a recession.
The situation at the upper turning point. The situation at the
upper turning point is such that any unfavorable development can
easily bring about a recession. Commodity prices and factor prices
are both high by comparison with those prevailing at the preceding
lower turning point. The pool of idle labor has been exhausted.
The competition for labor has resulted in wage advances in excess
of price advances. Profit margins have been narrowing for some
time. If there was considerable installment buying during the early
stages of the recovery, repayments may be exceeding new consumer
credit creation. The resulting destruction of bank debt reduces the
money supply and makes it difficult for firms to meet higher wage
demands through higher prices. Increasing competition from
abroad similarly operates to hold prices down. Many building
projects in the capital goods sector will have been completed and
workers will have been laid off. Bank loan rates tend to tighten,
and requests for additional credit are subjected to more searching
scrutiny. The inevitable slowing down in the rate of increase of
consumer demand works back through the system, bringing with it,
as we have seen, absolute declines in the replacement orders flowing
to many firms. Under the circumstances it would be surprising if
some firms did not find themselves in financial difficulties. A bad
break anywhere can start a recession.
The contraction phase. Once a contraction gets started there are
forces within the system which, for a time, drive the economy
further and further from the full employment level. The acceleration principle now operates powerfully in reverse. An increasing
part of current consumer buying is satisfied by inventory reductions.
The rate of inventory liquidation is likely to be increased by two
forces, (a) Firms are under pressure from the banks to reduce their
loans. Sales from inventory are frequently the only way of doing
this. These sales plus the distress sales of firms in bankruptcy cause
a sharp fall in prices, (b) Pessimistic price expectations lead
thoroughly solvent firms to cut back their inventories in the expectation that they can be replenished later at lower prices. Unemployment grows and this reduces the volume of consumer spending
directly and indirectly. The unemployed have less to spend; the
incomes of those not yet affected by the recession will buy more
goods than before, but the fear that their incomes may be reduced

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

381

in turn or cut off entirely leads their recipients to save for this eventuality. The expectation of further price reductions also leads consumers to hold off.
Wages tend to lag behind prices on the downswing. Economists
differ as to the effect of general wage reductions. If the cuts lead
to the expectation of further cuts, firms may be induced to hold
back on repairs and maintenance outlays. Certainly, large construction projects are not likely to be launched as long as there is an expectation of further wage reductions. Firms building later when
costs were lower would have a permanent competitive advantage
over those who had built too soon. Nonetheless the fact that the
real wages of employed workers increase during the contraction puts
a further squeeze on the profit margins of firms and may increase
the number of firms that are forced to discontinue production entirely because of their inability to recover their average variable
costs.
But our account of a typical business cycle, while desperately
abbreviated, is nonetheless sufficient to show that there are forces
at work in modern economic systems which tend to drive them toward the full employment level, once a recovery gets started, and
away from that level once a contraction gets started. Economic
theories of the business cycle are particularly concerned with identifying the forces that operate at the upper and lower turning points
of the cycle and the measures that might eliminate or at least
dampen down the amplitude of the fluctuations in business activity.
We shall describe in the next chapter the theory developed by
the late John Maynard (Lord) Keynes which undertakes to show
how the State, operating within the framework of private property
and private enterprise, can eliminate the business cycle. In the
following chapter we shall describe another theory which holds
that the business cycle is the result of structural maladjustments
which develop during the expansion phase of a cycle.
Both theories draw upon the many single or dominant cause explanations of the cycle which have been advanced by students of
the business cycle. We shall conclude this chapter by a brief listing
of these "single cause" explanations of the cycle.
A ROSTER OF BUSINESS CYCLE EXPLANATIONS 5

Actually it is an exaggeration to say that any theory of the business cycle is literally a single cause theory. But most of them do
have a preferred or dominant cause. Before listing these dominant
5

Moulton, Controlling Factors, pp. 42-53.

382

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

cause explanations it is well to remind the reader that any theory
has to show why the dominant force fails to set in motion compensating adjustments sufficient to keep the economy operating at the
full employment level.
Jevon's sun-spot theory. The great English economist Jevons
(1835-1883), who shares with the Austrian Boehm-Bawerk the honor
of developing the concept of marginal utility, suggested that the
business cycle might be due to cyclical fluctuations in crop yields
as a result of weather changes. The weather changes, in their turn,
might be due to the periodic appearance of sun spots. This explanation has few if any followers today.
Psychological oscillations. All students of the business cycle have
noted that the climate of opinion changes with the phases of the
cycle and tends to reinforce the up- and the downswings of the
cycle. Extremists say that the cycle is the product of a state of mind
and that it is the fear of depression that begets depression. The
cure is exhortation.
Monetary explanations. According to another school of thought
the root cause of business fluctuations is to be found in the modern
fractional reserve banking system. Under this system, it is held,
banks are forced by inter-bank competition to manufacture excessive credit when there is need for credit restrictions, and to destroy
bank credit when credit should be extended liberally.
The historical record shows that the contraction phase of the
cycle is always accompanied by falling prices. Are falling prices
the result of the contraction or the cause? If they are the cause,
then the cure is price level stabilization. The proposal for a 100
percent legal tender reserve system (Model No. 4 in Chapter 23) is
based on this assumption. The advocates of a 100 percent gold reserve banking system, on the other hand, have no objections to
slowly falling prices in a technologically progressive economy, but
grave political objections to entrusting to government the delicate
task of injecting and withdrawing money from the monetary circuit
in response to the needs of business. What is harmful, they say, is
the collapse of prices in the early stages of the downswing. They
attribute this collapse to the fact that the expansion was financed
in part by "forced savings" provided by the banking system. Deprive the banks of this power and business oscillations will lose their
violence.
Price rigidities. According to another school of thought the failure
of an economy to adjust to constant changes in supply and demand
characteristic of a free economy is due to the fact that some prices

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

383

are very flexible while others are very inflexible. Unemployment
necessarily emerges in the sectors where prices are rigid. Business
cycle control should be directed at the elimination of the monopoly
controls which make price rigidities possible.
Overproduction. Economic theory makes it clear that there can
be no such thing as general overproduction in a world in which
human wants can never be completely satisfied. Overproduction
explanations thus really turn out to be a variant of the underconsumption theory to be examined next, or a "malproduction" explanation, too much production in some lines and not enough in others.
This malproduction may be due to speculative excesses, or to the
bunching of innovations in some sector (railroad building in one
period; automobile production in another) leading to overexpansion,
followed by losses and a release of resources at a rate that exceeds
the capacity of other sectors to absorb them.
Underconsumption. All underconsumption theories allege that
market forces either fail to generate sufficient purchasing power or
else distribute it in such fashion that consumers cannot take off the
market all the goods which can be produced at the full employment
level. The politically most influential underconsumption theory is
associated with the name of Karl Marx. He was one of the first
writers to stress the periodicity or cyclical character of production
under capitalism. He attributed this periodicity, as well as wars
and practically all other social ills, to the fact that competition permitted the businessman to pay the worker only a living wage for his
services despite the fact that the worker regularly produced more
than his subsistence. The difference, which he called "surplus
value," went to the businessman as profits. The system tended to
produce more than could be consumed. Consequently profits periodically collapsed, unemployment ensued, and a large part of the
value of the property accumulations of the exploiting capitalists was
destroyed. The remedy was to pay the worker the full value of his
product. This could not be done as long as the businessman owned
the instruments of production. Therefore the instruments of production should be socially owned.
Many economists who accept as desirable the institution of private property and private enterprise see in the tendency of wages
to lag behind prices in the expansion phase of the cycle a partial
reason for the violence of the upswing and the inevitability of the
ensuing contraction. They hold that there is not sufficient consumer
spending power in the system to sustain the economy at the full
employment level.

384

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

Another variant of the underconsumption explanation links depressions to the extremely unequal distribution of personal incomes
that capitalism tends to create. The well-to-do tend to save more
than businessfirmscan profitably use. The excess of savings reduces
the effective supply of money, causes prices to fall, and forces firms
to contract employment.
Innovations. Another explanation of the cycle is based on the
observable fact that innovations—the introduction of new production techniques, new goods and services, etc.—are not distributed
evenly over time, but rather come in "bunches." This explanation
is closely associated with the name of Joseph A. Schumpeter, one
of the most distinguished economists of this century.6
To innovate is not the same as to invent. An innovation is a first
actual application of an invention to the processes of production.
It is a new arrangement of the factors of production in a given firm,
conceived by the inventor but put to use by the entrepreneur in
the expectation of a higher net return to the firm. The inventor and
the innovator (the entrepreneur) may be one and the same person,
but this is usually not the case.
For various reasons, innovations tend to be launched rather than
distributed evenly over time. The appearance of a number of significant innovations over a short period of time imparts an upward
momentum to the economy, i.e., produces the prosperity phase of
the cycle. The prosperity continues over the period that the innovations are being introduced; this period will be marked by a high
level of investment spending by firms. Once the gestation period of
the innovations is at an end, once the stream of consumer goods is
rapidly enlarged by firms employing the new techniques, the wave
of innovations has spent itself, investment spending drops sharply,
and the economy moves into the contraction phase of the cycle.
Eventually the stage is again set for a new wave of innovations and
the process starts over again.
This so-called "single cause" explanation actually makes use of
various elements that have been identified as the prime movers in
other single cause explanations. For example, the wave of innovations on the upswing must somehow be financed, and Schumpeter
assumes that some of this financing will come from money newlycreated by banks operating under a fractional reserve banking system. This elasticity of the money supply under fractional reserve
banking has been identified earlier as one of the single cause ex• Joseph A. Schumpeter, Business Cycles, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York:
1939.

FACTS AND THEORIES IDENTIFIED

385

planations. Also, to explain the appearance of large-scale unemployment during the contraction phase, this theory relies in part on
the observed sluggishness of wages and other costs in the face of
sharp declines in the money demand for goods. This sluggishness
of wages and other costs has also been singled out by others as the
cause of unemployment.
In brief, this theory states that, given such conditions as a fractional reserve banking system and a sticky cost structure, progress
must be a process of three steps forward and two backward; the
three steps forward represent prosperity, the two steps backward
represent depression. Schumpeter draws the conclusion that absolute stability in economic life can be obtained only at the price of
stopping progress. He argues that to eliminate the conditions such
as fractional reserve banking that give progress its three-forwardtwo-backward nature would be to eliminate progress as well. Society is confronted with a choice: Progress or stability. It can't have
both.
It is generally recognized at the present time that no one-cause
explanation of business cycles is adequate to explain any of the
cycles for which we have detailed records and that any promising
program for controlling the cycle should take account of the fact
that each future cycle will have certain unique features which will
call for special treatment. Theories can be helpful to us in our
search for these special features, but they can never replace good
judgment.
The theories to be examined in more detail in the next two chapters are multiple-cause theories. The first, however, emphasizes
inadequate demand; the second structural disequilibrium.

Questions:
1. (a) Distinguish between voluntary and involuntary unemployment,
(b) Distinguish among frictional, seasonal and cyclical unemployment.
2. Describe the role of (a) the Acceleration Principle and (b) the
Multiplier Principle in both the expansion and contraction phases
of the business cycle.
3. Describe the changes in the production-mix that take place during
the course of the business cycle and identify (a) the elements in the
situation at the upper turning point that are conducive to a contraction and (b) the elements in the situation at the lower turning point
that are favorable to a recovery.

386

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

4. (a) Why are rising money incomes and, hence, rising demands for
goods much less likely to cause price increases in the early stages of
a recovery than at the upper turning point?
(b) If rapid price rises do occur in the early stages what conditions
are presumably present?
5. "Given a fixed quantity of money, the expansion phase of the cycle
would be marked by gradually falling prices." Discuss.
6. "The fully employed worker is usually better off during the downswing than the upswing of a cycle." Explain and discuss.
7. List and describe briefly each of the single-cause explanations of the
business cycle. Which of these do you think is most consistent with
the description of the business cycle presented in the first part of
the chapter? Why? Are there any happenings in the business cycle
which your "favorite" explanation fails to explain?

28
The Theory of Effective Demand

E consequence of The Great
Depression of the 1930s was to raise full employment to preeminent position among the economic goals of the industrialized
countries of the world. A second consequence was a rather general
loss of faith in the ability of a private enterprise system to sustain
itself at the full employment level. A third consequence followed
naturally from the first two: a tendency for people to look to government as the only agency strong enough to counteract the apparently inherent instability of private enterprise.
The origins of the theory. As noted before, and as will be pointed
out in more detail in Chapter 38, governments did intervene in a
great variety of ways in attempts to pull their countries of out The
Great Depression. Most of these interventions were instinctive reactions to popular pressure for the government to "do something
about it." They were not based on any consistent theoretical explanation of why the system was unstable, of why the government
had to intervene, or of the forms that the intervention should take.
The usual explanation which traditional economic theory had to
offer was that men were unemployed because they were asking too
much for their services. It followed that the proper policy of government was to do nothing that would interfere with the competitive lowering of wages needed to induce employers to rehire the
unemployed workers. Whether this was or was not a sound analysis
of the problem was of little importance; the "do nothing" policy
which it implied was politically impractical. Governments threw
away the books and struck out, more or less blindly, to "do something about it."
In 1936 a book appeared which had an almost instantaneous success. It met the needs and the mood of the moment. It offered an
387

388

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

internally consistent explanation of the instability of private enterprise systems. It assigned to government a major responsibility for
correcting this instability, thereby providing an ex post facto justification for many of the actions already taken by governments, including various actions launched in the interests of social reform
rather than economic stability as such. Finally it proclaimed that
the purpose of its prescriptions was to save private capitalism.
Stripped of all its qualifications, the central thesis of the book
was that at any given time there is some level of spending that will
provide useful and remunerative employment to all able and willing
workers, and that it is the responsibility of government, through its
power to tax and to spend, to see to it that this level of spending is
maintained. Marx had declared that the maintenance of full employment was only possible through a revolutionary and probably
violent transformation of the organization of the economy. The
new prophet declared that everything the reformers had dreamed
of could be accomplished within the existing institutional framework.
It is not surprising that the book was well received in policy making circles. Nor is it surprising that many economists found it a
blessed "middle ground" which permitted them to escape from the
dilemma of offering a choice of two politically unpalatable policies
—a "do nothing" policy or a scrapping of the private enterprise system.
The book which created all this furor carried the ambitious title,
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money} It was
written by an English economist, John Maynard Keynes.
John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946) first attracted public attention with
his brilliant indictment of the Versailles Peace Treaty in a small book
entitled The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1919). For years
Keynes was a Reader in Economics at Cambridge University, editor of
the British Economic Journal, and an eloquent exponent of the neo-classical theories of the great Professor Alfred Marshall. During the 1920s, and
largely as a result of Britain's failure to share in the general recovery,
Keynes came to the conclusion that a new approach to the problem of
employment was needed, and that traditional theory stood in the way.
The final outcome of his thinking on this issue is the book here under discussion. Regardless of its ultimate place in the history of economic
thought, its influence on contemporary events has been enormous. Many
thinkers have contributed bits to the new theory, but Keynes' contribu1
J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Harcourt. Brace and Company, New York: 1936.

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

389

tion was so decisive that the theory itself is usually referred to as the
Keynesian theory, rather than the theory of effective demand.
WHAT IS MEANT BY "KEYNESIAN ECONOMICS"?
Few treatises on economics have ever aroused more interest and
controversy among economists and noneconomists than The General Theory. Some have regarded Keynes as the New Prophet;
others have regarded him as the old Mercantilist devil in disguise.
As economists, we are interested only in what he may have contributed to our understanding of economic life and hence to our
ability to shape it to the goals of the individuals in the economy.
For this reason, it is important to distinguish among the following
four aspects of so-called Keynesian economics: (1) Keynesian goals,
(2) Keynesian language, (3) Keynesian analysis, and (4) Keynesian policy. Almost all present-day economists, including those who
reject Keynesian goals and policies, find parts of the Keynesian language and analysis useful. It is also important to recognize that
there are many varieties of Keynesians and that almost all economists are and were Keynesians to some degree long before the appearance of The General Theory.
Keynesian goals. A distinguishing feature of Keynesian economics is the great emphasis it places on full employment as an
economic goal. In part this is a reflection of the general depressionborn emphasis on the goal of full employment. This emphasis becomes important only when specific policy action is being discussed.
Thus, if a given action can be shown to serve the goal of full employment at the expense of other goals, such as international
specialization or the best use of employed resources, the Keynesian
economist is more likely than the non-Keynesian economist to approve of the action.
One other value judgment is characteristic of most Keynesian
economists. Given a choice between two techniques for providing
full employment, one of which places the adjustment costs largely
on the wage- and profit-taking groups and the other of which places
the adjustment costs largely on the rentier or interest-taking groups,
the Keynesian would normally prefer that the costs rest on the
rentier groups.
As Keynes himself said, in referring to his low-interest rate policy,
"Now, though this state of affairs would be quite compatible with some
measure of individualism, yet it would mean the euthanasia of the rentier,
and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of
the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital/' (pp. 375-6)

390

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

Keynesian language. Keynes and his followers have introduced

or popularized a number of words and phrases which have become
a standard part of the vocabulary of economics. Some of the most
important of these are listed and defined below. The definitions are
rough and approximate rather than precise.
Effective or aggregate demand. Effective demand is the total
amount of money spent on goods and services in a given country
over a given period of time, usually one year. The four sources of
effective demand or total spending are consumers, investors, foreign
buyers, and the various units of government.
The consumption function. The consumption function is a schedule of the numbers of dollars that would be spent for consumer
goods out of incomes of various sizes over a given period of time.
It may be used to describe the consumer-spending-income pattern
of a single consumer, of a group of consumers, or of all consumers
in an economy.
The average propensity to consume. The average propensity to
consume is the ratio between consumer spending and consumer disposable income. It is a measure of the fraction of the average dollar
that is spent on consumer goods.
The marginal propensity to consume. The marginal propensity
to consume is a ratio between an increase in spending and the increase in income with which it is associated. It is a measure of
the fraction of an extra dollar of income that is spent on consumer
goods.
The propensity to save. By definition, saving is that part of a
consumer's disposable income that is not spent on consumer goods.
It follows that the average propensity to save is equal to one minus
the average propensity to consume. Thus if a consumer spends 0.8
of his income, he must be saving 0.2 of his income. The marginal
propensity to save is equal to one minus the marginal propensity to
consume.
The multiplier. As defined in the preceding chapter, the multiplier is the ratio between an increase in income and the increase in
investment spending which generated that increase in income.
Thus if a one-dollar increase in investment spending generates a
five-dollar increase in income, the value of the multiplier is five.
It can be shown that the value of the multiplier is determined
by the marginal propensity to save of the individuals through whose
hands the dollar passes.
The multiplier can be derived by dividing the dollar by the mar-

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

391

ginal propensity to save. This means that the higher the marginal
propensity to save, the lower the multiplier.
The accelerator.2 The accelerator is a ratio between a percentage
increase in investment spending and the percentage increase in
consumer spending which generated the increase in investment
spending. Thus, if a 10% increase in consumer spending were to
generate a 50% increase in investment spending, the value of the
accelerator would be 5.
Marginal efficiency of capital. The marginal efficiency of capital
is the expected rate of return on capital goods. It is approximately
the same as the marginal productivity of capital. (See the chapter
on Interest for the significance of the marginal productivity of
capital.)
Liquidity preference. Liquidity preference refers to the attitude
of an individual toward holding his assets in liquid or in nonliquid
form. If he wishes to hold them in the most liquid form of all, he
will hold them in the form of money—either currency or a bank
deposit. Less liquid forms would be government or corporation
bonds, stocks, real estate, etc. These are less liquid than money
because they are not generally accepted in direct exchange for
goods and services.
The technical definition of liquidity preference is that it is a
schedule showing the numbers of dollars an individual would wish
to hold in the form of cash at a series of interest rates at a given
moment of time.
The motives that lead an individual to wish to hold a certain
fraction of his resources in the form of cash are (a) the transactions
motive, or the need for a certain amount of cash to handle day-today transactions; (b) the precautionary motive, or the desire to
have a certain amount of cash available in case of unexpected needs
for cash; and (c) the speculative motive, or the desire to profit
through changes in the value of money.
KEYNESIAN ANALYSIS: THE ASSUMPTIONS
Keynesian analysis of fluctuations in production and employment
is centered on fluctuations in effective demand. This analysis, like
that of pure competition, involves a number of assumptions. We
shall identify two of the more important assumptions of Keynesian
analysis in this section and two more in the next section.
2
This is a pre-Keynesian concept which Keynes' followers have borrowed from
Professor Clark of Columbia University. J. M. Clark, "Business Acceleration and the
Law of Demand," Jour, of Pol Econ., XXV (1917), 217-235.

392

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

Assumption No. 1. As noted before, the central thesis of Keynesian analysis is that increases in effective demand increase employment, whereas decreases in effective demand decrease employment.
This thesis is modified to recognize the obvious fact that, once full
employment is attained, further increases in effective demand bring
increases in prices rather than in employment.
This analysis of the effect of changes in effective demand on production and employment involves a very important assumption.
The assumption is that certain key prices, particularly the price of
labor, do not vary in proportion to changes in effective demand.
(This is assumption No. 1.) Otherwise, changes in effective demand would work themselves out entirely through price changes,
leaving production and employment unaffected.
The importance of this assumption can be illustrated as follows:
Suppose an individual is spending $100 a week on items costing an
average of $1.00 each. He would be buying 100 units a week and
providing employment to the number of workers needed to produce
100 units. Now let his spending (effective demand) drop to $90
a week. If the average price were to drop to 0.90, he could still buy
100 units. If wages and other cost elements were to drop in the
same proportion, the suppliers could continue to employ the original number of workers and the drop in spending would have produced no change in production and employment.
On the other hand, if the price were to remain unchanged at
$1.00 or if wages and other cost elements were to remain unchanged, or if prices and costs were to fall but less than in proportion to the 10 percent fall in his spending, there would be a drop
in production and employment.
In other words, to argue that fluctuations in effective demand
produce changes in production and employment, it is necessary to
assume that certain prices and costs are "sticky," i.e., that they are
not sufficiently responsive to changes in demand. This assumption
is largely valid for many price and cost elements, particularly
wages, in modern industrial economies, including our own. However, it raises this question: Is the cause of the unemployment the
drop in effective demand or the "stickiness" of wages and prices?
The policy implications of this question will be considered in a later
section.
Savings-investment and assumption No. 2. Keynesian analysis is
concerned not only with the effects of fluctuations in effective demand but also with the causes of those fluctuations. Briefly stated,
it argues that changes in effective demand are produced largely by

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

393

changes in the relationship between savings and investment. When
savings decisions call for more dollars to be saved than investment
decisions would provide outlets for, effective demand (and, hence,
production and employment) declines. Conversely, when savings
decisions call for fewer dollars to be saved than investment decisions would provide outlet for, effective demand (and, hence,
production and employment) increases.
For these results to follow, it is necessary to assume that the interest rate does not perform one of the important functions ascribed
to it in our chapter on interest. That function was to equate the
rate of savings to the rate of investment.
It was held there that a fall in the demand for savings would produce a fall in the rate of interest, a rise in consumer spending, and
a reduction in the supply of loanable funds. A new equilibrium
rate of interest would quickly emerge which would equate the
amount of savings offered and the amount demanded. The fall in
the attractiveness of investment spending would result in a decrease
in investment spending, compensated for by an increase in consumer spending, i.e., in a change in the direction of spending but
not in its total amount. This change in the direction of spending
would probably result in some frictional unemployment but, given
price and wageflexibilities,it would be of short duration.
It is important that we note here one of the further limiting assumptions of the analysis in Chapter 14. The stock of money was
assumed to be fixed. There could be no credit creation by the government or by the banking system. Hence the number of dollars invested could never exceed the number of dollars saved. In all
modern economies with their fractional reserve banking systems
the quantity of money can and does change; hence it is possible in
the real world for the number of dollars invested to exceed the
number of dollars voluntarily saved and made available for investment purposes. This is quite clear. But is it possible for the number of dollars invested to fall short of the number of dollars saved,
that is, for large-scale "hoarding" of saved dollars to take place?
The analysis of Chapter 14 would indicate that changes in the
interest rate and the resulting changes in investment and consumer
spending make such a result improbable and, in any event, unimportant. Keynesian economics argues that this result is not only
probable but fraught with far-reaching consequences.
To begin with, it is argued that the interest rate cannot move
over a sufficient range, and with the required speed, to offset the
violent fluctuations in the marginal efficiency of capital (and,

394

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

hence, in the level of investment spending) that are characteristic
of a modern economy. In the words of Keynes,
"With markets organized and influenced as they are at present, the
market estimation of the marginal efficiency of capital may suffer such
enormously widefluctuationsthat it cannot be sufficiently offset by correspondingfluctuationsin the rate of interest." (p. 320)
In the second place, Keynesian economics argues that the interest rate cannot prevent savings from outrunning investment under
various circumstances because the interest rate is not determined by
the interaction of saving and investment decisions, as the earlier
analysis would imply. Rather, the rate of interest is said to be determined by the interaction of the demand for money to be held
in the form of cash (liquidity preference) and the supply of money.
From Keynes again,
"Thus the rate of interest at any time, being the reward for parting with
liquidity, is a measure of the unwillingness of those who possess money
to part with their liquid control of it. The rate of interest is not the
'price' which brings into equilibrium the demand for resources to invest
with the readiness to abstain from present consumption. It is the 'price'
which equilibrates the desire to hold wealth in the form of cash with the
available quantity of cash." (p. 167)
This is the same as saying that decisions to save and decisions to
invest are largely independent of each other. The quantity of savings, according to Keynesian economics, is determined not by the
interest rate but by the level of income and the propensity to consume. The interest rate determines the form in which savings will
be held and not the level of savings itself. Interest is the reward for
parting with liquidity and not the reward for abstaining from consumption.
From this it follows that savings can exceed investment and that
this will result in a fall in effective demand.
In short, traditional theory argued that the interest rate, if free
to move, would always equate the rate of savings to the rate of investment. It followed from this that large-scale hoarding of money
was impossible. Keynesian theory argues that the interest rate does
not equate the rate of savings to the rate of investment, that the
rate of saving can exceed or fall short of the rate of investment, and
that, in fact, changes in effective demand resulting from just such
relationships between savings and investment are largely responsible for the business cycle.

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

395

KEYNESIAN ANALYSIS: THE CYCLE
As indicated above, the Keynesian analysis of the cycle is centered on rhythmic changes in the relationship between savings and
investment. The analysis is based on the observable fact that investment spending fluctuates widely over time. It is also based on
the assumption (which will be identified as assumption No. 3) that
saving is a relatively stable function of income over time.3 In other
words, while the saving propensity is seen as changing but slowly,
the extreme fluctuations in investment spending produce first expansionist then contractionist forces in the economy. In the words
of Keynes again,
"The Trade Cycle is best regarded, I think, as being occasioned by a
cyclical change in the marginal efficiency of capital, though complicated
and often aggravated by associated changes in the other significant shortperiod variables of the economic system." (p. 313)
We turn now to the way in which this analysis is used to explain
the various phases of the business cycle.
The expansion phase. Almost all economists are agreed on the
sequence of events during the expansion phase of the cycle. We
shall not bother to repeat the sequence here. Rather, we shall pick
up the description of the sequence as the economy nears the full
employment level. Wages and other cost elements begin to "catch
up" with prices. This comes about in part because the expansion of
production can no longer proceed by re-employing idle men and
resources; thus there is considerable upward pressure on wage rates.
Another very important reason is that consumer spending has not
kept pace with increases in income. In other words, increased saving is slowing down the rate of increase in consumer spending.
Because of these factors and because of the increased supply of
capital goods as the economy nears the full employment level, the
actual return on capital goods is rising slowly or not at all or even
falling off slightly.
The crisis or upper turning point. According to Keynes, the crisis
is marked by a sudden collapse of confidence, by a violent fall in
the marginal efficiency of capital. (It should be remembered that
3
Recent statistical studies have raised serious doubts about even the short-run
stability of the consumption function. These studies have found that the relationship between the percentage of income saved and the size of the income is subject
to significant changes over relatively short periods of time. While this does not
negate the whole Keynesian analysis, it certainly makes less reliable predictions of the
course of total spending based on the assumption of a stable consumption function.

396

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

the marginal efficiency of capital is the investor's subjective evaluation of future returns on capital goods, and not the objective evaluation of present returns on capital goods.)
The actual returns on investment have fallen short of the enthusiastic expectations of the expansion phase. The reaction is a rapid
reversal of investor psychology. Wild optimism is replaced by deep
pessimism and the marginal efficiency of capital collapses, and with
it, of course, the rate of investment spending. This reaction may
be "triggered" by a tightening of bank loans or by the failure of one
or more large enterprises, or some similar event, but the stage was
set by the relative oversaving in the final stages of expansion.
The interest rate, instead of dropping so as to induce more investment, actually rises. The demand for cash increases dramatically as
individuals and firms try to escape from the losses certain to come
to those who hold on to goods. At the same time, the amount of
money in the system is decreasing as banks contract loans and hence
demand deposits. These two factors combine to drive up the interest
rate.
The contraction phase. For some time after the crisis, firms continue to sell largely out of inventories. Eventually, however, inventories are reduced to levels consistent with the lower rates of
sales and firms begin to produce again, but on a limited scale. One
important factor limiting the scale of operations is that wages and
other cost elements come down slowly and profit margins are narrow or nonexistent. (As we shall see, this does not lead the Keynesians to recommend drastic wage cuts as a cure for the depression. )
As incomes fall, savings are reduced even more rapidly. Eventually savings are reduced to the level where they are absorbed by
the limited investment activity. However, consumer and investment spending together do not provide a level of effective demand
adequate to provide employment to all workers; large-scale unemployment exists and can persist.
The rate of interest falls as demands for cash abate and as the
reduction in bank deposits slows down. However, and this is an
important part of Keynesian economics, it is possible that the rate
of interest will not fall to a level sufficient to induce an increase in
investment spending, an increase which might start the economy
rolling again. The factor which prevents the interest rate from falling is the preference for liquidity. Keynesian economics assumes
(and this will be identified as assumption No. 4) that below some
interest rate (say, 2%), individuals and firms will be unwilling to

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

397

part with liquidity, i.e., they will hold their savings in the form of
cash or bank deposits rather than offer them on the loanable funds
market. This places a "floor" under the interest rate.
However, there is no floor under the marginal efficiency of capital. Even a 2% interest rate may be greater than the expected return
on many investments. Thus investment activity remains at a low
level and with it, the level of effective demand. The economy may
reach an "underemployment equilibrium," i.e., a position of equilibrium characterized by chronic unemployment. In other words,
there may be no inevitable "lower turning point." The economy
may bump along on the bottom with no self-correcting tendencies
until some outside force or the government intervenes to start it
moving upward again.
The mature economy thesis. Some but not all Keynesian economists have argued that the possibility of chronic unemployment is
enhanced by the increased maturity of the economies of the Western nations. They hold that we were saved from chronic unemployment in the nineteenth century by the inherent dynamism of a
rapidly growing economy.
Three dynamic forces, so the argument goes, were at work to
provide investment outlets for the increasing savings in the economy. They were the westward push, the rapid rate of growth of
population, and a series of revolutionary technological developments. It is argued that these forces are now either weakened or
eliminated, and new investment outlets are less likely to appear at
the fortuitous moment to jar the economy out of an underemployment equilibrium. We shall have more to say of this pessimistic
forecast in a later chapter.
KEYNESIAN ANALYSIS AND THE NATIONAL INCOME
ACCOUNTS

The magnitudes of Keynesian analysis are also the magnitudes of
national income accounting which were described briefly in Chapter 2 and are developed more fully in the Appendix. Disposable income, consumer spending, savings, investment spending, foreign
purchases and sales, government expenditures and revenues—these
terms all have rough equivalents in the national income accounts,
as those accounts are developed by the Department of Commerce
in this country, and by similar agencies in other countries. It is not
surprising that these accounts have proved useful to all economists,
but particularly to those who employ the Keynesian analysis.
These data provide the empirical material for testing the useful-

398

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

ness of the Keynesian analysis in ex post explanations of cyclical
movements. They provide, as well, estimated values for many of
the variables and constants in Keynesian analysis. Finally, they
seem to open up the possibility of predicting the future course of
total spending (and hence employment, under the Keynesian analysis). This in turn would permit governments to take the kinds of
action the Keynesians would recommend to prevent the level of
effective demand from falling below the full employment level.
Some economists are sufficiently enthusiastic about the possibility
of using the national income accounts for cycle control that they
hail this development as the final step in transforming economics
into a true science. Others in both the Keynesian and non-Keynesian ranks are more dubious about the possible uses of national
income accounts for cycle control purposes. The minimum margin
of error is large. Corrections continue for several years before the
final figures for the gross national output and its components are
regarded as anything more than provisional.
This is an important controversy; it relates not just to the question of whether the Keynesian analysis is a proper base for policy
decisions but also to the question of whether the national income
accounts are sufficiently reliable to be used in developing important
public policy. As a matter of fact, the first draft of the Full Employment Act of 1946 called for the government to take strong decisive
action whenever the national income accounts revealed the existence of or the prospective existence of certain relationships that
promised to reduce the gross national product below the level required for full employment.
KEYNESIAN POLICY

We turn now to the question asked earlier. "Is unemployment
caused by a fall in effective demand or by the failure of prices,
wages, and other cost elements to adjust to the fall in effective demand?" The Keynesian answer is that, for policy-making purposes,
the fall in effective demand must be treated as the cause. That is,
they largely reject a policy program based on "sticky" wages and
costs as the causes of persistent and large-scale unemployment.
They argue that it is not politically or economically feasible to
secure the degree of wage and other cost flexibilities needed to
prevent unemployment. Even more important, most Keynesians
argue that it would not be desirable to do so if it were possible,
because wage cuts would create unfavorable expectations. Consumer spending and investment spending would be cut back in

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

399

anticipation of further wage cuts. This behavior would intensify
the downward movement of effective demand and make the situation worse rather than better.
Keynesian policy is built around the idea of preventing fluctuations in effective demand below the full employment level. Moreover, the Keynesian analysis of the fluctuations in demand leads to
the conclusion that the government must play an important and
positive role in this task.
Beyond this there is considerable disagreement among economists who use the Keynesian analysis as to precisely what the government should do. We shall identify here some of the major lines
of policy action that are generally accepted as part of Keynesian
economics. The reader should keep in mind that various men would
place different emphasis on different lines of action and that there
is no such thing as Keynesian Policy in the singular sense.
It is convenient to classify the policies according to the element
in total spending to which they are most closely related. Each
policy is directed to attaining and maintaining a level of effective
demand adequate to bring full employment.
Consumer spending. Consumer spending is said to be determined by the amount of disposable income flowing to consumers
and by the average propensity to consume. It follows that an increase in one or both of these determinants would lead to an increase in consumer spending. How can the government bring this
about?
One proposal is that disposable income be increased by the
simple device of lowering tax rates. Another proposal is that a
direct supplement to consumer incomes be supplied by the government. Another is that payment rates under the various social security programs be increased so as to place more income in the hands
of consumers. These proposals are designed to increase disposable
income.
Some of the most controversial Keynesian proposals deal with
ways of increasing the average propensity to consumer, particularly
the proposal to accomplish this objective by redistributing income
from high-income, high-saving groups to low-income, low-saving
groups. The redistribution could be effected by a progressive income tax combined with an expanded program of free or belowcost government services for low-income groups. Other ways are
frequently proposed by special interest groups, who find in this
idea a convenient way to identify what is good for them with what
is "good for the economy." Most Keynesians now recognize that a

400

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

drastic redistribution of income would be needed to produce even
a modest increase in consumer spending. Because of fears that such
a redistribution of income might produce a more than proportionate
reduction in the willingness to invest, Keynesians increasingly emphasize other avenues to full employment.
Investment spending. Investment spending is said to be determined by the schedule of the marginal efficiency of capital and the
rate of interest. Because of the "psychological" nature of the marginal efficiency of capital, Keynesians usually propose to work on
it indirectly, particularly through increasing consumer spending
and thus the demand for goods and services produced by capital
goods.
Direct action in this area is usually limited to attempts to control the interest rate. It will be recalled that the interest rate is
said to be determined by liquidity preferences and the quantity of
money. The quantity of money obviously lends itself very easily to
direct control by the government. Thus an important part of
Keynesian policy for raising effective demand is a low-interest rate
maintained by whatever increases in the quantity of money may be
necessary.4
Foreign spending. Another way of increasing the demand for
domestic goods and services is to encourage exports and discourage
imports. This suggests tariff increases. Actually governments were
trying to increase effective demand for home-produced goods in
this and similar ways long before the appearance of The General
Theory.
Keynesians reject in principle national "beggar-thy-neighbor"
policies. Hence, in general, they would prefer to "stay away" from
devices that reduce the volume of international trade. Even those
who have broken most completely with traditional thinking find it
difficult to reject the arguments in favor of free trade. This can
lead to some peculiar paradoxes in policy decisions, as will be
shown later.
Government spending. Almost without exception, Keynesian
economists argue that the problem of maintaining effective demand
at the full employment level cannot be solved completely by the
kinds of action just described; that it will usually be necessary for
the government to use its own spending power to fill the last part
of the gap between private demand and the necessary level of
effective demand.
This use of the government's power,to tax (or borrow) and spend
4

The method of doing this was discussed in Chapter 23, particularly pp. 296 ff.

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

401

to maintain a given level of effective demand (as distinguished
from its use to discharge the normal functions of government) is
usually referred to as fiscal policy. Keynesian economists regard
this as a two-edged sword. Budget deficits can be used to inject
spending power into the system; budget surpluses can be used to
withdraw spending power from the system. Fiscal policy is distinguished from monetary policy, which is the use, for similar purposes, of the government's power over the quantity of currency in
circulation and over the ability and opportunity of banks to create
and destroy bank money. Although Keynesians do not reject monetary policy completely (see the section on the interest rate), they
hold that monetary policy alone is usually inadequate to the task
at hand.
The much-discussed "pump-priming" undertaken by the Roosevelt Administration is an example of fiscal policy used in a deliber-.
ate attempt to increase effective demand. The idea was that the
government could prime the pump with an increase in its own
spending, that this would stimulate private spending, and that soon
private spending would attain such volume that government deficit
spending could be discontinued and the economy would continue
to expand. Although this line of thinking is still advanced by some
Keynesian economists, others have abandoned it because of the
difficulty of answering this question: If the injection of doses of
government deficit spending has a magnified and cumulative effect
on effective demand, will not the withdrawal of those supplements
to demand have a similar, but negative cumulative effect?
A number of Keynesian economists frankly admit that it
may be necessary for the government to operate with a perpetual
budget deficit if full employment is to be maintained. The following statement of a leading professional economist is representative
of a point of view that was widely held during the 1930s and still
enjoys a substantial following.
"There are many who will profoundly dislike and distrust these proposals, especially the proposal for indefinitely continued government
deficit spending. Under our present forms of economic and political
organization, however, there seem to be no major alternatives. We will
not ourselves, in the aggregate, voluntarily spend all of any increases in
our current incomes on the current purchase of goods and services, but
insist on hoarding a part of each increase. By so doing, we thereby make
some measure of subsequent unemployment in private industry inevitable. Yet it is a paramount duty %i society as a whole, in a democracy, to
furnish reasonable opportunities for employment to every person who

402

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

wants to work. It is therefore up to the government to persuade us,
coerce us or delude us, as the case may be, into doing for the common
welfare and for our own individual good that which we will not voluntarily do ourselves. When undertaken to combat unemployment in private enterprise, a properly planned program of government deficitspending operations hurts nobody and benefits everybody. None lose,
and all gain." 5
While this statement is not representative of all Keynesian thinking, it is a reasonably logical extension of Keynesian analysis. However, fiscal policy is often conceived of as involving a balanced
budget over time. That is, budget deficits to bring full employment
will be offset by budget surpluses to prevent inflation once full
employment has been achieved. Whatever form it takes, the policy
of using budget deficits to increase effective demand when unem.ployment threatens is a central part of Keynesian policy. Whether
the deficit is to be obtained by increasing expenditures while leaving taxes unchanged or by reducing taxes while leaving expenditures unchanged is one of the intra-family disputes still proceeding
in the ranks of Keynesian economists.
Keynesian policy and inflation. The policies outlined in the preceding discussion were all directed to the problems of combating
deflation and unemployment. Does Keynesian policy include prescriptions for inflation as well? Admittedly the policy measures
were developed at a time when unemployment was the problem.
However, most modern Keynesians would argue that their analysis
also suggests the proper action to take to combat inflation as well.
Specifically, they would recommend budget surpluses as an antiinflation device. It is interesting to note, however, that rarely do
the men who recommend redistribution of income from the rich to
the poor as an anti-deflation device follow their logic to the point
of recommending redistribution of income from the poor to the
rich as an anti-inflation device.6
There are some who argue that the proper way to combat inflation is general or selective price controls, rather than induced decreases in effective demand. Their argument is that such induced
decreases in effective demand may "get out of hand" and plunge
the economy into depression.7
5
J. W. Angell, Investment and Business Cycles, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.,
New York: 1941, p. 289.
6
If tax rates on large incomes are to be pushed higher every time the economy
falters, with no relaxation during the prosperous periods, it can only be a matter of
time before taxes destroy the mainspring of the private enterprise system.
7 See p. 677.

THE THEORY OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND

403

An appraisal of Keynesian policy. The set of policies outlined
above clearly represent strong medicine. But massive unemployment is a serious problem. It is quite appropriate, therefore, that
policy makers should not shrink from strong medicine just because
it is strong. However, it is also imperative that they examine the
medicine closely to see if it will do what it is supposed to do, and
if the after-effects of the medicine will not be worse than the disease.
The experience of the economy in wartime demonstrates that
government spending on a sufficient scale can eliminate unemployment. The questions then are whether a recovery induced in this
way can be sustained without perpetual deficit spending and
whether the side-effects of Keynesian policy represent problems less
or more serious than unemployment itself.
Some of the issues raised by Keynesian policy are the following:
Will a redistribution of income to increase effective demand seriously reduce the incentives to efficient use of resources in the
economy? Will continued government deficit spending, and the
possible encroachment on private sectors of the economy associated
with it, frighten the private investor and thus lead to a decrease in
private investment spending? Will a low-interest rate policy implemented by continuing increases in the quantity of money result in
a perpetual disequilibrium in the allocation of resources between
consumption goods and capital goods? Will the pressures of special interest groups, continued after the attainment of substantially
full employment, lead to perpetual inflation? Is planned secular inflation workable if groups are aware that it is planned? Would
a continuing use of price controls to combat inflation eventually
destroy the market mechanism? Can Keynesian stabilization policies be followed without necessitating a considerable restriction of
international trade?
We shall consider a number of these questions in the next chapter and still more in later chapters, particularly those dealing with
international economic relations and the concept of planning. In
Chapter 45 we shall present and examine a program for maintaining
full employment drafted by a group of economists at the request
of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations. The
program seems to be a faithful, well-written and logical application
of Keynesian policy to the world economic situation as it exists
today.
We turn now to the question of whether there are alternative
ways of securing greater stability in production and employment,

404

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

ways which involve less sacrifice of other goals than may be involved in the Keynesian way. We shall give particular attention
to an analysis of the cycle which identifies the cause of the downturn as overinvestment rather than underinvestment; we shall find
that this analysis implies that Keynesian policy would make the
situation worse rather than better*
Questions:
1.

What elements in the Keynesian analysis made it attractive to the
governments of industrialized countries in the late 1930s?

2.

(a) State the central thesis of Keynesian economics.
(b) Identify the major premise (assumption) underlying this thesis.
(c) Does the description of the business cycle in the preceding chapter indicate that this premise is largely valid as a description of
behavior in modern economies?

3.

Explain (a) the traditional position regarding the interest rate as an
automatic mechanism for equating the rate of saving to the rate of
investment, (b) the grounds on which Keynesians reject this equilibrating mechanism, and (c) the role which they assign to the interest
rate.

4.

Identify the four sources of effective demand and indicate which
source is the least stable, i.e., which type of spending is subject to
the most violent swings. Indicate how this is related to the Keynesian
theory of the business cycle.

5.

Identify with some precision the Keynesian analysis of (a) the causes
of relative oversaving in the latter stages of the expansion phase and
(b) the way in which this oversaving contributes to the downturn.

6. The Keynesian theory of underemployment equilibrium rests on two
assumptions, one with respect to the interest rate and one with respect to the opportunities for investment spending. Identify the
two assumptions and show why both are necessary to the underemployment-equilibrium thesis.
7.

Identify several ways in which each of the four components of total
spending might be increased. In each case, indicate whether you
believe the policy is or is not consistent with the operating requirements of a private enterprise economy, and why.

8. Identify the way in which Keynesian policy might be used to combat
inflation.

29
Alternative Theories

XRADITIONAL economic theory long
regarded unemployment as due primarily to either the immobility
of the unemployed workers or to their unwillingness to work at
the wages currently offered. In either case they were "voluntarily"
unemployed and the responsibility was on them to make the decisions that would restore them to the ranks of the employed.
Later this position was modified to the extent of recognizing that
violent swings in the level of spending confront workers (and the
economy at large) with adjustment problems of such magnitude
that the adjustments are likely to be unnecessarily painful and timeconsuming. This led to greater emphasis on control of spending,
but the technique of control, in contrast to the Keynesian technique
of fiscal manipulation, was to be primarily monetary control operating on the quantity of money through the medium of the Central
Bank. Thus, for years, business cycle policy discussion centered on
such questions as how much and what kinds of power to give to the
central bank, and how and when each of the powers should be used.
With some modifications and exceptions, modern followers of traditional economic theory still look on improved monetary policy and
greater mobility of resources and flexibility of prices and wages as
the best ways of moderating business fluctuations.
Beyond this, as in the Keynesian camp, there is considerable disagreement as to the precise causative factors in the business cycle
and the specific monetary control that should be applied, if any.
Of particular interest is the disagreement between those who favor
a return to the full gold standard and those who favor the use of a
managed currency, either a managed gold standard currency or a
managed fiat currency.
405

406

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

THE GOLD STANDARD AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

Those who favor a return to the full gold standard insist that
measures to prevent violent fluctuations in effective demand must
be consistent with the operating rules of that standard.1 In general
they argue that the kind of monetary manipulation which usually
follows, once some agency of government is empowered to moderate
domestic price fluctuations, results in a frustration of the processes
of the gold standard. Both monetary and fiscal policy are regarded
as potentially dangerous to the operation of the standard and thus
to effective international integration.
The rules of the gold standard were outlined in Chapter 25. They
require that the monetary authorities of a country permit an influx
of gold arising out of a favorable balance of payments to move
prices upward and thus correct the imbalance in trade. In the same
way, they require that the monetary authorities permit an outflow
of gold arising out of an unfavorable balance of payments to force
prices down, again to correct the imbalance in trade. In other
words, the trade-balancing mechanism of the gold standard works
through changes in domestic price levels. It is argued that these
price level movements need not produce unemployment if wages
and other cost items are flexible. If unemployment does appear, the
proper remedy is greater flexibility of wages. Attempts through
either fiscal or monetary control to halt the price level movements
will prevent the trade-balancing mechanism from working and thus
reduce world trade. At the same time, if the gold standard is permitted to operate, it will provide its own corrective to price level
movements in either direction, i.e., once prices have moved so as
to bring a balancing of payments the gold standard will operate
to prevent prices from continuing to fall or rise.
It follows from this that monetary action to prevent gold movements from affecting domestic demand and prices is inconsistent
with the operating requirements of the gold standard. This does
not imply a complete "do nothing" policy with respect to the unemployment that may be associated with the cyclical changes in
demand and prices. Rather it implies that policy should be directed
largely to the following two goals: (1) To increase the mobility of
1
This point of view is expressed most forcefully by the men associated with an organization known as Economists' National Committee on Monetary Policy. Such well-known
economists as James Washington Bell, Fred Fairchild, and Walter Spahr are members of
this organization and have presented vigorous arguments in support of the views to be
summarized in this section.

ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

407

labor and the flexibility of wages and other cost elements so as to
reduce the unemployment arising out of the changes in demand,
and (2) to provide for real distress cases arising in the adjustment
process without stopping the process itself.
These men hold, and history bears them out, that except in periods of international disintegration, such as have always followed
major wars, the fluctuations in prices called for under the gold
standard are not extreme, and that a reasonable amount of flexibility in wages and other cost elements is adequate to prevent widescale unemployment. They also argue that the adjustments under
the gold standard in a period of international disintegration, while
disagreeable, are apt to be less painful than those produced by
other arrangements.
In brief, these men argue that the economy of any country which
participates in international trade is going to receive an occasional
(and probably rhythmic) buffeting from the changing winds of that
trade; that an economy can ride perpetually on an even keel only
if it cuts itself off from all contacts with other economies; that the
buffeting is apt to be less painful under the gold standard than
under other arrangements; and that there is a strong presumption
in favor of the gold standard on other grounds, particularly its
demonstrated ability to encourage and promote international specialization. Finally, they see the choice as one between peaceful
international integration, achieved at the cost of some instability
in domestic economies, and absolute domestic economic stability,
achieved at the cost of war-producing international disintegration.
MANAGED CURRENCY AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

Another group of economists of general orthodox persuasion reason as follows: If the various shocks to the economic system of a
country, such as those coming from gold movements, from the
bunching of technological changes, from the operation of the acceleration effect, etc., did not lead to cumulative and violent changes
in the level of spending, the economy could probably adjust to those
shocks without great difficulty. If such were the case, there would
indeed be no need to use either monetary or fiscal controls to influence the volume of spending. They argue that such in fact is
not the case. On the contrary, psychological and monetary factors
tend to produce cumulative and often violent swings in total spending out of shocks which in and of themselves would not present
serious problems. These men lay particular emphasis on the per-

408

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

verse elasticity of the money supply as the cause of the violent fluctuations in total spending.2
The perverse elasticity of the money supply is said to arise out of
the practice of fractional reserve banking. As demonstrated in
Chapter 22, a change of one dollar in the reserves of a bank operating on a fractional reserve basis can lead to a change in customer
deposits several times larger. Thus an in-movement of one dollar
in gold can make possible an increase in the money supply of the
country of several dollars, the exact amount depending on the willingness of householders and firms to borrow and on the customary
or required reserve ratio. In the same way, the out-movement of
one dollar in gold can lead to a reduction in the money supply of
several dollars.
Given an unregulated fractional reserve banking system, movements in one direction or another, whether up or down, tend to assume runaway proportions because of the extreme elasticity of the
money supply. As evidence, they point to the fact that the expansion phase of the cycle has been characterized by rapid increases
in deposit currency and the contraction phase by rapid decreases
in deposit currency.
Some have argued that the cycle itself can be explained solely as
the response of the economy to changes in the quantity of deposit
currency. Others have admitted that the cycle may have other
causes, but that the violence of the cycle is a direct result of this
perversely elastic money supply.
If this reasoning is correct it follows that the cycle can be reduced
(or eliminated) by eliminating the perverse elasticity of the money
supply. Some propose that fractional reserve banking be replaced
by 100 percent reserve banking, either 100 percent gold reserve or
100 percent fiat currency reserve. The operation of these two forms
of 100 percent reserve banking was described in Chapter 23.
Others argue that the same results could be obtained with a less
radical change. They propose that the Central Bank be given adequate powers to check rapid changes in the level of demand deposits and that the nature and timing of the use of those powers be
written into the enabling law. This latter provision reflects the dissatisfaction of these men with the way in which Central Banks, including our own Federal Reserve System, have used their powers
2

Most of the arguments to be presented in this section can be found in A. G. Hawtrey,
"The Monetary Theory of the Trade Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 41,
May 1927, p. 471 ff.; H. C. Simons, A Positive Program for Laissez-faire, Chicago
University Press, Chicago: 1934; and Yale Brozen, Textbook for Economics, Wm. C.
Brown Company, Dubuque, Iowa: 1948.

ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

409

in the past. It reflects as well the preference of most economists
for "rule by law" over "rule by men."
In general these men argue that, if extreme and rapid changes in
total spending could be moderated in one or more of the ways described above, and if wages and other cost elements could be kept
reasonably flexible, the economy could "give with the punches" that
it must absorb if it is to participate in international trade and in
economic progress. The central issues between these men and
Keynesian economists turn on whether monetary controls are alone
sufficient to moderate fluctuations in total spending and whether
the economy can adjust to even moderate fluctuations. The main
issue between these men and the uncompromising gold standard
men is whether and to what extent monetary policy should be used
to moderate the influence of gold movements on domestic prices
and spending.
THE STRUCTURAL DISEQUILIBRIUM THEORY
Up to this point we have presented no detailed non-Keynesian
analysis of the business cycle. We have concerned ourselves largely
with policy questions. We turn now to a study of one particular
non-Keynesian analysis of the cycle usually identified as the structural disequilibrium or monetary overinvestment theory of the
cycle.3
We have selected this particular theory for study for several reasons. In the first place it illustrates the role of monetary factors in
the cycle, and is thus within the main stream of orthodox thinking.
In the second place, it leads to conclusions diametrically opposed
to the Keynesian conclusions and implies that Keynesian policy
would make matters worse rather than better. Thus it serves to
throw in high relief the issues that must be resolved in determining
proper policy.
In the description of the cycle in Chapter 27, attention was drawn
to the fact that the production-mix (the ratio between the output of
consumer goods and the output of capital goods) changes continuously over the course of the cycle. The central thesis of the theory
here under study is that the cycle is caused by unwarranted changes
in the production-mix, with first too many, then too few, resources
being devoted to the production of capital goods. The word "unwarranted" is used to signify that the changes in the production-mix
3
The best statements of this theory are to be found in F. A. Hayek, Monetary Theory
and the Trade Cycle, Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York: 1933, and G. Haberler, Prosperity and Depression, League of Nations, Geneva: 1937.

410

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

which produce the cycle do not reflect the real wishes of consumers.
The distortion of the production-mix is said to be induced by
changes in the quantity of money which permit investors to acquire
funds that have not been voluntarily released by consumers.
Warranted changes in the production-mix. To understand this

analysis it is necessary to understand what might be termed warranted changes in the production-mix. In Chapter 14 on Interest,
it was shown that, in an economy with a fixed stock of money, the
allocation of resources between the production of consumer goods
and capital goods is determined by the savings decisions of consumers. The proper number of resources to be used in the capital
goods industries is that number that can be purchased with the
funds consumers voluntarily save, i.e., refrain from spending.
Suppose now that consumers decide to save more dollars than
before. This will lead to an increase in the supply of loanable funds,
a decrease in the interest rate, and hence an increase in the number
of dollars borrowed for the purchase of capital goods. This decrease
in the demand for consumer goods and the accompanying increase
in demand for capital goods will lead to a shift of resources from
consumer goods industries to capital goods industries. This is a
warranted change in the production-mix. The resulting situation
is stable because it reflects the voluntary decisions of consumers.
Unwarranted changes in the production-mix. Now suppose that
would-be investors are able to acquire funds for the purchase of capital goods, not from the voluntary savings of consumers alone, but
from newly created stocks of money as well. The study of banking
under fractional reserve arrangements indicates that such newly
created money may come from bank loans, as well as from government-sponsored increases in the supply of currency.
This newly created money permits the investor to bid more resources away from the consumer goods' industries than consumers
have voluntarily released through their savings decisions. This
leads to an unwarranted change in the production-mix, and the
resulting situation is not stable because it does not reflect voluntary
savings decisions of consumers. When this newly created money
reaches consumers, as it must when it is spent to acquire resources,
they will use it to bid resources back into the production of consumer goods. This will cause serious difficulty to the investors who
have not as yet completed their capital goods' projects, and many
of those projects will have to be abandoned with great losses. Moreover, because resources do not move back and forth between the

ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

411

consumer goods and the capital goods industries with complete
freedom, there is certain to be some unemployment.
Application to the cycle. It should be obvious how this analysis
is applied to the business cycle. During the expansion phase, the
use of newly created money leads to a structural disequilibrium, to
unwarranted changes in the production-mix. The crisis comes when
investors can no longer acquire new stocks of newly created money,
a position that is certain to be reached eventually even under a
fractional gold reserve banking system. The situation that then
exists may be described as one of overinvestment (or, looked at
another way, undersaving) and the downturn is simply the start of
the inevitable reorganization of resource allocation that must come
about. Because of psychological factors and because of the rapid
decreases in the stock of money that follow the crisis, the reorganization or contraction phase may last for some time, will probably
involve substantial unemployment, and may even carry the reorganization beyond the point where the production-mix accords with
the spending and savings wishes of consumers.
Eventually, however, resources get shifted into consumer goods
industries and out of the overexpanded capital goods industries and
the stage is set for an inevitable recovery—and for the process to
be repeated again.
The role of the interest rate. Cyclical fluctuations come because
the interest rate is not permitted to perform its proper function,
which is to tell would-be investors how many resources consumers
are willing to release for the production of capital goods. Increases
in the supply of loanable funds during the expansion phase, coming
from stocks of newly created money, prevent the interest rate from
rising to warn investors that there is a shortage of real savings. Thus
they are led into error, into the error of launching more capital
goods projects than consumers will let them complete.
The solution. The solution is obvious: Let the interest rate perform its proper function. This requires that the sources of newly
created money be eliminated so that investors will always have to
turn to supplies of consumer savings for the funds they desire to
borrow. This would imply that fractional reserve banking must be
replaced by 100% reserve banking, or at least must be subjected to
careful control.
It also implies that the Keynesian policy of using government injections of new purchasing power at the upper turning point would
simply postpone and make more difficult the inevitable day of reckoning. The problem is one of a structural disequilibrium, and the

412

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

disequilibrium can only be made worse by continued additions to
the supply of money. Depressions, while disagreeable, are absolutely necessary periods of reorganization under the monetary arrangements that now exist. Either those arrangements must be
changed or we must be willing to permit the depression-type adjustments to run their course and lead us eventually to another period
of expansion.
A COMPARISON OF ORTHODOX AND KEYNESIAN
POSITIONS

Presented below, in tabular form, is a comparison of Keynesian
and orthodox positions with respect to the business cycle. It would
be well to preface this comparison with a word of caution. To say
that a man is a Keynesian economist is to say, at most, that he approaches the business cycle with the goals, the tools, and the policies
of what has come to be known as Keynesian economics. It implies
nothing about his approach to other areas of economic inquiry
where, actually, his approach may be either orthodox or heterodox.
Also, the differences between the two groups are differences of degree only, of emphasis rather than kind.
Keynesian economics is neither Socialism nor Fascism; it represents a sincere attempt of a large number of competent persons to
arrive at a solution to the serious problem of economic instability.
Nor is orthodox economics Blind Reaction; it too represents a sincere
attempt of competent persons to arrive at solutions to pressing human problems. The men in both groups are largely committed to a
system of economic organization based on free markets and free
decisions. The differences of opinion that exist simply reflect the
difficulty of identifying and measuring all of the relationships that
tie men and materials together in economic life. After all, man is
still the great enigma and, because he represents the raw material
of the social sciences, we cannot expect the same degree of unanimity of opinion there as in the natural sciences.
Goals
KEYNESIAN

ORTHODOX

Full employment should be the
single most important goal of publie economic policy; our ability to
attain other goals depends on our
first having attained this goal.

Full employment is an important
goal; but, so is maximum output,
international integration, avoiding
inflation, preventing government
encroachment on private sectors of
the economy, etc.

413

ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

Analysis
1. Large-scale unemployment is
caused by too low a level of effective demand.

1. Large-scale unemployment may
be caused by a variety of factors,
including misdirected demand as
well as a low level of effective demand, inflexible wages and costs,
an overly elastic money supply.

2. The recovery from a low level of
economic activity is not necessarily
automatic; positive intervention
may be needed to jar the economy
out of an underemployment equilibrium.

2. The forces making for a recovery from depression are selfgenerating.

Policy
1. Full-employment policy should
be directed to the goal of preventing the level of effective demand
from falling below the level adequate to provide full employment
at prevailing wages and prices.

1. Policy should be directed, at
most, to moderating rather than
eliminating fluctuations in effective
demand,

2. Attempts to increase the flexibility of wages and other cost elements would be both unwise and
futile.

2. Wages and other costs should
and can be made more flexible.

3. Monetary policy should be used
to maintain a low-interest rate, except in periods of inflation; however, monetary policy alone is
inadequate to the task of maintaining effective demand.

3. Monetary policy should permit
the interest rate to perform its
normal function of transmitting the
wishes of consumers to investors.
At the same time monetary policy
should be used to prevent violent
fluctuations in the quantity of
money.

4. If the economy seems to be
threatened with unemployment,
steps should be taken to redistribute income so as to increase the
propensity to consume.

4. Redistribution of income should
be undertaken only to take care of
hardship cases or to satisfy the
ethical criteria of the people; if
undertaken, it should be done in
such a way and with such moderation as would do least damage to
the incentive system of the economy.

414

BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

5. Primary reliance should be
placed on government deficits and
surpluses as offsets to destabilizing
influences in the economy. In particular, governments should stand
ready to increase their expenditures
(or reduce their tax rates) if private investment spending is not
sufficient to fill the gap between
consumer spending and the required level of total spending.

5. Substantial use of fiscal policy to
influence total spending is politically unwise and economically undesirable. It takes attention away
from the real problem of the failure
of the adjustment mechanisms of
the economy. It can easily lead to
inflation, either open or suppressed.
At the same time, governments
should permit the deficits to arise
that naturally follow from the organization of the fiscal system in a
period of falling incomes. If any
additional use should be made of
deficit finance, it should be accomplished through cuts in taxes rather
than deliberate (and often wasteful) increases in spending.

6. Finally, no one should be permitted to suffer extreme physical
hardship during a depression.

6. Agree.

A concluding note. This completes the apprenticeship training
on the basic tools of economic thinking. Obviously the tools developed here fall short, both in numbers and level of sophistication, of
those in the kit of the professional economist. However, the person
who has mastered the use of the basic tools is better equipped than
one who has not mastered them to understand the nature of the
choices confronting him as a citizen, and thus better equipped to
assume the responsibilities of citizenship.
We now propose to show how these tools can be used to analyze
a few of the more important problems that confront the American
economy. We have selected for study six broad problem areas: (1)
government and business; (2) government and labor; (3) government
and agriculture; (4) social security; (5) international economic
relations; and (6) fiscal policy. We then turn to a study of alternatives to the private enterprise form of economic organization.

Questions:
1. "Non-Keynesian economists believe that no attempts should be made
to control the level of total spending in the economy." Discuss.
2. "The operation of the gold standard inevitably produces alternating

ALTERNATIVE THEORIES

415

periods of full and under-full employment." Discuss in the following
framework: (a) The validity of the thesis that the operation of the
gold standard inevitably produces fluctuations in the level of effective demand, and (b) the validity of the thesis that such fluctuations
in effective demand must inevitably produce wide fluctuations in the
level of employment.
3. "The only way in which a country can maintain absolute stability of
prices and employment is to cut itself off from all contacts with the
outside world." Discuss.
4. Identify the way in which fractional reserve banking is said to contribute to fluctuations in effective demand. Does this line of thinking
lead inevitably to the conclusion that fractional reserve banking must
be eliminated? Why or why not?
5. (a) Distinguish between "warranted" and "unwarranted" changes in
the production-mix.
(b) Identify the relationship between "unwarranted" changes in the
production-mix and changes in the quantity of money.
(c) This analysis is said to lead to the conclusion that depressions
are necessary and inevitable periods of "purging" the economy of
structural disequilibria. Outline the rationale behind this argument.
(d) Identify the way in which this line of reasoning leads to the
conclusion that the Keynesian policy of pouring new money into
the economic system to prevent depression would only make matters
worse.
6. "A Keynesian economist is one who rejects all of the conclusions of
traditional economic thinking." Discuss.
7. "The only solution which Keynesian economists have for a depression
is for the government to spend huge amounts of money on public
works." Discuss.
8. "Orthodox economists believe that full employment is not a desirable social goal." Discuss.

PART SIX

Business ana Labor

30
Government and Business

W E HAVE now completed our account of the way in which an enterprise economy is supposed to
work. We began with a highly simplified model and with a very
demanding definition of competition. We then proceeded to withdraw the limiting assumptions. First of all we recognized that a
national economy is a growing thing; there is growth in population and progress in the arts. Growth introduces a large element
of uncertainty into human calculations. This led us to revise our
definition of competition in terms of performance rather than of
market structure. Next we withdrew the assumption of isolation
and discovered that differences in rates of growth of the factors
of production and differences in social attitudes toward private
enterprise are such that market forces may be expected for some
time to come to widen rather than narrow national differences in
factoral rewards and hence in international levels of living.
The chapter on the State provided us with some useful tests for
determining what the State should and should not do to create
the kind of environment required if private enterprise is to promote
the general welfare. One of the recognized functions of the State
is to provide a medium of exchange. Chapters 21 through 26 were
devoted to an examination of the ways in which national States
discharge this responsibility. Our conclusion, which admittedly involved a political judgment, was that, in terms of alternatives, the
gold standard is still best in that it provides a bulwark against fiscal
irresponsibility and a common measuring rod that favors international specialization and international trade. We also discovered
that the handling of the money problem has a direct and important
bearing on the capacity of an economy to provide a high and sustained level of employment.
419

420

BUSINESS AND LABOR

The three immediately preceding chapters reviewed the history
of business fluctuations and a number of the attempts at explaining the causes of these fluctuations. Several explanations were examined in some detail. We noted that, although the same policy
recommendations could be derived from most of them, the tendency has been the other way. In general those who make use of
the Keynesian theory of effective demand rank full employment
higher in their goals for a free society and show more confidence
in the State as the agency for bringing about adjustments than do
those who prefer to use more orthodox theories for policy recommendation purposes. These divergences are thus due in part to
differences in value judgments.
We now proceed to an examination of a number of contemporary
economic problems.
In this chapter we shall consider the relationship of the State to
business. In succeeding chapters we shall examine the State's relationship to labor and to agriculture. Thereafter we shall deal
with the State's efforts to provide a greater degree of security to
individuals with insufficient claims to earned income—the so-called
problem of social security—and to the people as a whole as a result
of their economic dealings with people in other countries. Finally
we shall examine the relative merits of private enterprise and public enterprise as organizing principles and of the possibility of a
middle way which has come to be labeled "Planning."
GOVERNMENT AS A PROMOTER OF COMPETITION

In this country public opinion, until very recently at least, appeared to favor competition as the best method of inducing the
businessman to serve the consumer. At the same time our elected
representatives at the local, state, and federal levels have always
been subject to group pressures. Most groups endorse competition
in principle, but consistently urge the need for protection of their
special interests against "unfair" competition. The ideal of each
special interest group appears to be: a bit of monopoly for us; vigorous competition for the others. It is not surprising, therefore, that
public controls always involve inconsistencies. We shall find that
government is at one and the same time a promoter of competition
and of monopoly. This section deals with the role of government
as a promoter of business competition.
Anglo-Saxon common law. In the Middle Ages competition as
we know it was virtually nonexistent. Economic activities were
minutely controlled both on the manors and in the towns. The

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

421

rights and duties of the serfs and the freemen on the manors were
prescribed and protected by custom. In the towns the guilds exercised a similar control, in which custom also played a large role.
The public looked to authority and not to the market to see to it
that the rules of the game were enforced.
As the medieval order broke down, individual initiative came to
play an increasingly important role. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that as more and more individuals defied immemorial
custom the old order broke down. In England the common or
customary law worked constantly to consolidate and extend the
area within which the individual could work out his own salvation, protected from the guilds, on the one hand, and the King on
the other. In the course of time the English common law became
the great shield and buckler of the individual against the unreasonable restraints on his right to earn his living as he saw fit.
The English colonists took this common law with them to the
New World. Much of it is still recognized by our state and federal
courts. In general, with reference to the problem at hand, it is designed to promote competition by making illegal unreasonable
restraints on trade through unfair competition and efforts to monopolize or coerce.
The phrase "pursuit of happiness," which is listed in our Declaration of Independence as one of the inalienable rights of man,
appears to have meant, among other things, the right to pursue
"any of the known established trades and occupations of the country, subject only to such restraints as equally affected all others." 1
The enforcement of the common law is conservative and economical. It is conservative because it builds on precedents. A
competent lawyer, familiar with judicial opinions going back over
several centuries, can tell his business client with considerable confidence whether the courts will hold a proposed line of action to
be legal or illegal. This certainty that there will be no sudden
change in the rules of the game fosters investment, innovation, and
risk-taking. At the same time the ingenuity of the judges can always be counted upon to discover ways of outlawing business practices which public opinion has come to disapprove of strongly.
The common law is also very economical of administration because it relies upon the injured party to bring his case before the
courts. Every businessman, every worker, and every consumer is
thus a potential law enforcement officer.
Nonetheless the common law has its shortcomings. The costs of
1

Justice Field in the Slaughter House Cases, 16 Wall. 36 (1873).

422

BUSINESS AND LABOR

obtaining justice may be prohibitive for the little fellow. In a
technologically progressive society the lag in bringing common law
rules into line with the requirements of new situations may be
excessively long. Finally the common law has difficulty in dealing
with practices that involve interstate trade. Consequently statute
law has come to the aid of common law. But neither the common
law nor the statute laws enacted by the several states could cope
with problems involving interstate trade. It was this fact that led
to the popular demand during the last quarter of the 19th century
that the federal government should assist in the enforcement of
competition through its power to regulate commerce between the
states. The Sherman Act of 1890 was the result of this popular
demand.
Anti-trust: The record. The Sherman Act was regarded at the
time as an implementor of the common law.2 The Act declared that
"every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or
conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several
states, or with foreign nations" was illegal, and that every person
"who shall monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce
among the several states, or with foreign nations" should be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. Violations were made subject to criminal penalties (fines and imprisonments) and civil penalties which
might include the breaking up of monopolistic combinations. An
injured party may sue to recover threefold the damage sustained,
including the costs of the suit.
In 1914 two important acts were passed, designed to strengthen
the Sherman Act.
The Federal Trade Commission Act established a five man bipartisan board which was to keep under constant survey business
practices and to issue complaints and "cease and desist" orders
against "unfair methods of competition in interstate trade." Following a court decision in 1920 (the Gratz Case) the Commission
may also issue "cease and desist" orders against practices which
tend "unduly to hinder competition and create monopoly." Prior
to 1938 the courts held that the "unfair methods" must have injured a competitor before they would be declared illegal. Proved
injury to consumers was regrettable but not illegal. The WheelerLea amendment of 1938 added the concept of deceptive to that of
2

See Vernon A. Mund, Government and Business, Harper & Bros., New York:
1950, p. 145.

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

423

unfair with a view to bringing the interests of the consumer within
the purview of the Commission.
The Clayton Act was directed at the elimination of so-called cutthroat competition. Section 2 of the Act prohibited (a) price discrimination in the sale of commodities of like grade and quantity
when the effect is to injure or prevent competition, unless (and
here is the loophole which makes the administration of the Act uncertain) the discrimination is undertaken in good faith to meet
competition; (b) exclusive sales or tying contracts; (c) corporate
ownership of stock in competing corporations; and (d) interlocking
directorships. Section 7 was directed against consolidations of
competing companies by stock acquisitions undertaken with a view
"to substantially lessen competition."
The Robinson-Patman Act of 1936 was passed with a view to
protecting small distributors against big distributors like the Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company (A & P) by giving the Federal
Trade Commission the power to fix the permissible limits for quantity discounts. The offer or the accepting of a discount in excess
of the permissible limit constitutes a criminal offense.
An elementary textbook in economics is not the place to describe
in detail the operation of these and other federal measures which
have been enacted for the purpose of strengthening competition.
There is space here only to indicate some of the more significant
developments.
1. The courts have consistently taken the position that collusive
practices are illegal. In so far as these practices are condemned by
reputable businessmen, the Act appears to have been reasonably
effective in restraining the minority who will always make sharp
deals if they think they can get away with it. It has thus helped
raise the plane of competition.
2. At the time the Act was passed joint action by competitors
was frequently brought about by the process of transferring a sufficient number of shares in competing firms to trustees to enable
them to dictate the policies of the several companies. The Act
ended this type of collusive action.
3. But in ending collusion through trust agreements the Act promoted the outright consolidation of competing companies. One
company would buy up the stock of competitors or purchase their
physical assets. Or a new company would be formed which would
acquire control of competing facilities by purchase. In 1895 the
Supreme Court held that such mergers of manufacturing enter-

424

BUSINESS AND LABOR

prises were legal since they did not involve commerce as such.3
Hence the remedy, if any, lay with the states. The United States
Steel Corporation provided the most dramatic example of the possibilities of growth by merger. The Corporation was incorporated
under the laws of New Jersey in 1901. It brought within one giant
corporation a number of corporations which were themselves the
results of recent mergers. Thus it acquired the Carnegie Steel
Company with 20 plants, the Federal Steel Company with 20 plants,
the American Steel and Wire Company with 39 plants, the National
Tube Company with 15 plants, the American Bridge Company with
26 plants, the National Steel Company with 10 plants, the American
Tin Plate Company with 265 plants, the American Sheet Steel
Company with 26 plants, and the American Steel Hoop Company
with 14 plants. It was figured at the time that the United States
Steel Corporation controlled 56 to 70 percent of all lines of steel
manufacturing and some 80 percent of the best iron ore reserves
in the country.
4. Mergers such as this raised squarely the problem of bigness.
Can enterprise remain effectively competitive if the government
permits one firm to gain a commanding position in an industry?
Throughout the first three decades of this century the Supreme
Court, applying what was called "the rule of reason," consistently
took the position that bigness was not illegal under the Sherman
Act unless there was clear evidence of "unworthy motives" and
"predatory acts."
During the 1930s there was a marked change in the climate of
opinion. Two court decisions during the 1940s indicated that "bigness per se" constitutes a presumption that the power to monopolize
exists and that it is contrary to public interest that this power
should rest in private hands, regardless of whether it is in fact
exercised to raise prices and restrict competition.4 That this new
attitude is not a partisan political attitude is clear from the fact that
in 1950 the late Senator Taft suggested that Congress "should consider whether we should place a limit on the proportion of any industry which can be controlled by one company/'5 David E.
3 U.S. v. E. C. Knight Co., 156 U.S. I, 9. 7 (1895).
This new view was handed down in the government's suits against the Aluminum
Company of America and the "Big Three" tobacco companies—The American Tobacco Company, Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company, and R. J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company.
5
This quotation is taken from David E. Lilienthal, Big Business: A New Era,
Harper & Bros., New York: 1953, p. 136.
4

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

425

Lilienthal holds that "the shadow of criminality" now 'Tiangs over
some of our highly respected business leaders."6
Anti-Trust: an appraisal. Most students of our anti-trust laws
believe that they have contributed to the maintenance of competition in the United States. That monopoly and collusive practices
are not more widespread appears to be due to the fact that public
opinion in all walks of life (and not least in business circles) frowns
on both, and to the further fact that, with the exceptions presently
to be noted, efforts to monopolize or to restrain trade unduly lack
the protection of government. Hence the "perennial gale of competition" of which Professor Schumpeter spoke breaks down the
barriers which ingenious businessmen and their lawyers are continuously erecting.
We do not wish to give the impression that the situation is entirely satisfactory or that there is not much that our federal and
state governments could do under existing laws to strengthen the
competitive forces in the economy. Nor are we saying that all
"unfair practices" have been eliminated. The list of such practices
revealed by the "cease and desist" orders of the Federal Trade Commission, and reproduced in the footnote below,7 shows that competition is a rough-and-tumble game in which the unscrupulous
and the hard-pressed will resort to measures which the vast majority of businessmen will refuse to follow as long as they can look to
the courts for relief. It seems highly probable that these practices
would be far more prevalent than they are but for this fact. The
6

Ibid., p. 167.
This list is from Vernon A. Munr*, Government and Business, Harper & Bros.,
New York: 1950, p. 319.
Acquiring confidential information unfairly.
Advertising falsely or misleadingly.
Appropriating tradename or mark wrongfully.
Bribing customers employees.
Claiming indorsements or testimonials falsely.
Cutting off competitors' access to customers or market.
Cutting off competitors supplies.
Cutting prices arbitrarily to discipline a competitor acting independently on price.
Disparaging competitors and their products.
Inducing breach of competitors' contracts.
Misbranding or mislabeling.
Operating secret subsidiary.
Passing oft a product as and for that of a competitor.
Threatening infringement suits, not in good faith, to stifle competition.
Using or selling lottery devices in merchandising a product.
Delivering short measure.
Selling below cost to stifle competition.
Acquiring stock of competitor.
7

426

BUSINESS AND LABOR

success of anti-trust legislation is to be judged as much or more by
the illicit acts it prevents as by those it catches and punishes.
Our own conclusion is that if, as some allege (and, we think,
wrongly), our economy is becoming less competitive, this is not
due to anything inherent in the nature of private enterprise, but
rather to the willingness of government to provide the protection
of monopoly to special interest groups.
Providing information. Before leaving the topic of the role of
government as a promoter of competition a word is needed regarding a relatively inexpensive and very useful service of the federal government to business. We refer to the unceasing volume of
up-to-date and accurate information regarding market conditions
provided by various government offices. The Bureau of Foreign
and Domestic Commerce of the U.S. Department of Commerce
issues regular statistics of business activities which are very useful
to firms in making their production and marketing plans. The U.S.
Department of Labor's regular reports on wages and labor market
conditions are helpful. The monthly Federal Reserve Bulletins issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and the Bulletins of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks contain invaluable data needed for intelligent forward planning by business
firms. These are just a few examples of the way in which our government fosters business enterprise by reducing the area of
uncertainty that derives from ignorance of ascertainable facts.
Needless to say, these public activities are entirely consistent with
the operating requirements of a system which requires that the
participants in the play shall act as much as possible on the basis
of knowledge.
GOVERNMENT AS A PROMOTER OF MONOPOLY

Government, as was pointed out earlier, is responsive to popular
pressures and some of these pressures are directed against competition and in favor of monopoly. Sometimes the grant of monopoly
power is consistent with the ideal of a competitive enterprise system (as when the government grants a temporary monopoly as a
means of encouraging progress in the arts and sciences or when
it recognizes that in limited areas the public interest is better served
by recognizing and regulating monopoly), but in other cases it
represents a capitulation to powerful pressure groups. There is
space here for no more than a listing of some of the more important
ways in which government favors monopoly, with the briefest of
indications of the views of the authors regarding the consistency

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

427

or inconsistency of the measures with the over-all ideal of a competitive enterprise system.
Patents, copyrights, licenses, and franchises. Patents and copyrights are temporary monopolies granted by government for the
purpose of promoting progress in arts and sciences (cultural and
technical). In the long run they serve to strengthen and improve
the operation of a competitive enterprise system.
A patent is "a government grant to a person by which he is the
only one allowed to make or sell a new invention for a certain
number of years." The Constitution of the United States gives Congress this authority for the purpose of promoting "the progress of
science and the useful arts by securing for limited times to authors
and inventors the exclusive rights to their respective writings and
discoveries." Our patent laws, which date from 1790, and which
have been little changed since 1870, give the inventor of a process
that is "new and useful" the exclusive right to make, use, or sell his
invention. This right runs for a period of 17 years. The "new and
useful" test is very difficult to apply. The Patent Office generally,
and probably correctly, gives the patentee the benefit of the doubt.
It may well be, however, that unnecessary abuses have developed
in a law that has been unchanged for more than 80 years. We are
not here concerned with the pros and cons of the patent controversy, other than to note that patents constitute a publicly sanctioned monopoly, which is supposed to protect the consumer in the
long run by its favorable effects on the progress of the industrial
arts.
Copyrights give similar protection to the works of authors, artists,
musicians, playwrights, and others in the creative arts. In the
United States this exclusive right runs for 28 years from the date
of publication, and may be renewed for another 28 years.
Licenses and franchises are also devices for the deliberate creation of monopoly. A municipality very properly limits to a single
firm the right to tear up streets and establish the water mains
needed to serve its customers. The same situation holds for gas and
electricity and telephone service. These public utilities, as they
are known, are natural monopolies, in the sense that the consumers
are better served by one company than by many. In all these
cases competition would be either wasteful or unsatisfactory. Consequently the governmental unit involved is faced with the choice
of providing the service itself, or of authorizing a private firm to do
so, and then regulating it to see that the interests of the consumers
are protected.

428

BUSINESS AND LABOR

The tariff. Protective tariffs, as we have seen, limit the size of
the market and hence prevent the full development of territorial
specialization. If the territorial market is made small enough,
the economies of size may be unattainable or attainable only at the
price of accepting monopoly or oligopoly. When this happens, the
market structure is a creation of government, and if the actors behave as monopolists and oligopolists are supposed to behave, the
remedy would appear to be to widen the market by removing or
reducing the tariff barricades.
In general the vastness of the American domestic market has
been sufficient to support a considerable number of firms, thus
giving us the protection that comes from numbers. The fact remains, however, that the American tariff has and continues to be
a potent force limiting competition in certain fines. We shall argue
later that a reduction of tariffs to moderate levels and, equally important, a stabilization of duties at these levels would increase the
competitiveness of the American economy.8 Here it suffices to note
that any list of overt acts of government designed to foster monopoly would be incomplete that failed to include our protective tariffs.
Public monopolies. In all capitalistic countries some activities
which private enterprise could handle are owned and operated by
the State. A good argument can be made for public ownership and
operation of natural monopolies. By definition competition cannot
protect the public interest in such cases. Government must assume responsibility for seeing to it that the appropriate amount
of capital is invested in these fields, that this capital is permitted to
earn a return comparable to that in the competitive area, and that
those employed in these enterprises get neither more nor less than
people of comparable skills and responsibilities get in the competitive area. Government can do this through regulation or
through ownership and operation. Regulation involves a duplication of effort. First of all, the managements of the monopolies make
all of the usual operating decisions and then public commissions
check and countercheck, approve or disapprove. The late Professor Henry C. Simons of the University of Chicago argued in his article, "A Positive Program for Laissez-Faire" 9 that natural monopolies
belonged in the public domain.
8
See Chapters 19, 38, and 40 and especially p. 585 ff. for the test of moderate
tariffs.
9
This article was published by the University of Chicago Press, in 1934. It was
reproduced in the posthumus collection of some of Simon's shorter and less accessible
articles which appeared under the title Economic Policy for a Free Society, University
of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1948.

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

429

Public ownership of municipal utilities is widespread in the
United States. The United States Post Office is a monopoly, and
the TVA (a wholly federally owned corporation) has a monopoly
of the generation of electric power in the Tennessee Valley. In
many European countries the railroads and the telephone and telegraph services were, from the beginning, developed and operated
by governments.
The theory of indirect benefits has also been advanced in favor
of government ownership of natural monopolies which provide a
multiplicity of benefits, direct and indirect, measurable and immeasurable. We recognized this theory in our discussion of the
functions of the State in connection with multiple-purpose enterprises. Where a private firm cannot charge for real benefits because
of its inability to trace them to particular individuals and to exact
a payment for them, investment will stop short of the theoretical
optimum amount. Such situations require that the government
make the additional investment. It can do this through subsidies
to private firms or through direct operations.
The TVA has been defended on the basis of this theory. We
regard the theory as correct, but at the same time we admit that
the inability to measure these indirect benefits makes it very easy
for proponents of government action to exaggerate the benefits and
push investment far beyond the limit indicated by the theory. This
danger is particularly great if the people in the area within which
most of the indirect benefits accrue do not have to pay most of the
costs. When the federal government intervenes, the pressures for
overinvestment by the people in the benefited area are at a maximum. The pressures are much less if the enterprises are carried out
by the states and their local subdivisions, or by a group of states
acting on the authority of an interstate compact. The Port of New
York Authority provides an example of a large public enterprise
carried on by a public agency deriving its powers from a group of
states.
All of the foregoing acts of government, including tariffs, provided they be stable and moderate, can, without too much difficulty,
be defended as consistent with the operating requirements of a
predominantly private enterprise form of economic organization.
There have been increasing examples of late, however, of a loss of
faith in the over-all beneficence of competition. Those producers
who are threatened by competition seek protection. They argue
that they are performing socially valuable services and that the impersonal forces of the market should not be allowed to eliminate

430

BUSINESS AND LABOR

them. They appeal to our sense of fair play, to our very natural
sympathy for the weak. Yet when the State intervenes to protect
the weak, it is in fact restricting the opportunity for the more efficient to serve consumers. In the long run, the owners of resources
are also hurt since they are prevented from transferring their resources to the firms which could and would pay more for the use
of them. As was pointed out in the earlier discussion of profits
(Chapter 12) public approval should not go to the businessman who
is losing money, but rather to the one who is competing fairly and
is making money, for it is he who is best serving the interests of all
of us as consumers and as resource owners.
Fair trade practices. During the 1930s one state after another
undertook to aid branches of the retail trade by the passage of fail
trade laws. These laws affect, for the most part, brand-name products, particularly liquors, drugs, cosmetics, cigarettes, and other
triumphs of the art of product differentiation through advertising.
In many states the acceptance by a single retailer of an agreement
not to sell a brand-name product below a specified price made
every other retailer subject to criminal prosecution if he cut below
the fair-traded price. Customers could, however, buy the same articles at lower prices in states which had not enacted fair trade laws
and have them shipped in by express or parcel post. The merchants in the "fair trade" states naturally complained and, accordingly, in 1937 the Congress of the United States passed the
Miller-Tydings Act.10 This Act forbade the importation and sale
of fair-traded products to consumers in "fair trade" states at less
than the price to which the local dealers were committed. With
this encouragement state after state enacted retail price maintenance laws until, at the end of 1950, only three states had refused
to join the procession. In May, 1951, the Supreme Court declared
the Act unconstitutional, but in 1952 the Congress enacted further
legislation which appears to have gotten around the constitutional
hurdle erected by the Court.
Interstate trade barriers. In joining the Federal Union the several states gave up the right to protect their domestic markets from
interstate competition. In so doing they created the largest freetrade market in the world, and paved the way for the tremendous
industrial development of the next century and a half. The difference in the productivity of American labor, and hence in the level
of living of the American worker, as compared with the produc10
This law was passed in the form of a rider to the District of Columbia Appropriations Act of that year and over the protest of President Roosevelt.

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

431

tivity of that of Western Europe, the birthplace of the Industrial
Revolution, is perhaps due as much to this market situation as to
any other single force. Yet in recent years, and particularly during The Great Depression of the 1930s, state governments made
extensive use of the police power, ostensibly to preserve the safety,
health, and general well-being of their citizens, but in fact to shelter
local businesses from interstate competition.
A study made at the University of Michigan and published by the
U.S. Department of Commerce in 1942 u listed state protective devices under the following five headings:
1. Barriers by prohibitions.
2. Barriers by protective tariffs.
3. Barriers by special requirement.
4. Barriers by indirection.
5. Barriers by equalization.
There is space here for only one or two examples of each of these
protective devices. (The statements are put in the past tense, since
the practices are continually changing and some of those cited here
may no longer be in effect. The barricades are still numerous and
vexatious.)
Many states restricted state-supported institutions to the purchase
of supplies manufactured within the state. Employment on public
works was frequently limited to citizens of the state.
Michigan taxed wine made from grapes not grown within the
state 12/2 times as heavily as wine made in Michigan from products
75 percent or more grown within the state.
A favorite protective device was to impose a special tax upon
imports which was not imposed on local producers. To all intent
and purposes this is a protective tariff of the kind the Constitution
was intended to outlaw.
The practice of Oklahoma of requiring that bread manufactured
outside the state and sold within the state had to be labeled with
the date and hour of baking is an example of protection by the imposition of a special requirement.
New York's protection of her dairy industry provided a neat example of protection by indirection. No out-of-state firm could sell
milk or cream within the state without first obtaining a permit
from the New York Commissioner of Health. And he could not
issue such a permit unless a representative from his office had per11

E. H. Gault and E. S. Wolaver, Interstate Trade Barriers and Michigan Industry, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Govt.
Printing Office, Washington: 1942.

432

BUSINESS AND LABOR

sonally inspected the out-of-state producer's cows, barns, stables,
milk houses, water supply, milk equipment, utensils and milk.
Barriers by equalization were secured by passing regulatory laws
which differed materially from similar regulatory laws in other
states. Compliance with these special regulations made it unprofitable for most out-of-state firms to attempt to enter the market.
Unshelled walnuts and filberts sold in Oregon had to meet special
Oregon standards. Conflicting state motor vehicle laws prevented
"the full use of our highways for trucking purposes/'
CONCLUSION
When one takes into account all of the restrictions on competition imposed by federal and state laws it seems to many economists,
including the writers, that government and not Big Business represents the major force promoting monopoly in the United States at
the present time. Some of these interventions may have a favorable
long-run effect on competition (copyrights and patents, for example), but most of them are the result of pressures upon our law
makers coming from the little fellow who seeks to protect himself as best he can from the perennial gale of competition which
appears to be characteristic of a vigorous and dynamic capitalism.
In the next few chapters we shall show how these same pressures have gone far toward exempting organized workers and organized farmers from the test of competitive markets.
Questions:
1. Indicate how English common law promoted private competitive
enterprises and why it is at once conservative and economical.
2. Identify briefly the federal laws listed in the text which modified the
Sherman Anti-Trust Act and indicate the nature of the modifications.
3. "The anti-trust laws have been more successful in preventing agreements through collusion than through mergers of competing firms."
True or false? In the light of the discussion of collusion in Chapter
17 argue for or against the proposition that it is socially more desirable to outlaw collusion than mergers.
4. Identify the "rule of reason" and its relevance to the problem of
bigness, and indicate the present position of the Supreme Court on
the issue of bigness.
5. Argue for and against the proposition that the federal government

GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS

433

should "place a limit on the proportion of an industry which can be
controlled by one company."
6. Identify public measures which promote monoply and indicate with
supporting reasons which, if any, appear to be consistent with the
operating requirements of a vigorous, growing and responsible private enterprise system.
7. "Both the common law which the American colonists brought with
them from England and the Federal Constitution which they adopted
in 1789 were designed to protect and foster competitive private enterprise." Argue, with supporting reasons, for or against the correctness of this statement.

31
Wage Policy and Employment

W AGES have never been determined exclusively by competitive market forces. In feudal times
the guilds and the municipal authorities undertook to fix "just"
wages, which meant wages just sufficient to permit workers to live
according to the customary standards of their class. During the
Mercantilist period national governments tried to keep wages down
both because high wages were thought to encourage extravagance,
sloth, and idleness and because of the fear that they would prevent
a country from developing a favorable balance of trade. During
the course of the 19th century attempts at fixing wages were abandoned by all of the important industrial countries. Reliance was
placed on competition to fix them at their appropriate levels. Efforts of workers to raise wages through collective bargaining were
either forbidden or severely circumscribed. Nonetheless, even in
the hey-day of competitive capitalism, custom-made wages were
sticky, causing them to lag behind prices, both on the up- and the
downswing of the business cycle. Most contemporary democratic
governments now attempt directly and indirectly to raise wages
and narrow the geographical and skill differentials which market
forces tend to produce. While the pressures behind these interventions are primarily political, the supporting arguments are predominantly ethical.
In this chapter we shall identify four "ethical" propositions frequently advanced as tests of the fairness of prevailing wages and
then consider how wages conforming to these propositions would
affect the performance of a private enterprise economy, and the
welfare of wage earners, taken as a whole. In the next two chapters we shall describe and appraise recent federal labor legislation
in the light of our theoretical conclusions.
434

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

435

Ethical wage standards. The following four propositions are frequently advanced as tests for determining whether prevailing wages
are fair:
1. Wages should be based on ability to pay.
2. Wages for similar work should be equal.
3. The minimum permissible wage should be high enough to provide an unskilled worker and his family with enough for health,
efficiency, and general well being.
4. Wages should be high enough to enable workers to buy back
the products of industry.
We shall examine these propositions first on the assumption that
an economy has already reached general equilibrium; thereafter
we shall reexamine them on the assumption that an economy has
not yet reached its general equilibrium position.
THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES IN AN ECONOMY IN
LONG-RUN EQUILIBRIUM

In an economy operating under conditions of pure and perfect
competition and in long-run equilibrium, wages would be based
on ability to pay and real wages for equal work would everywhere
be the same. Whether the wages for the unskilled would satisfy
the "health, efficiency, and general well being" standard would depend upon the productivity of the economy and the height of the
standard. If workers refused to marry and have families until they
received some specified minimum real wage, this minimum would
finally come to prevail. Population would decline and the marginal
productivity of the labor of the unskilled would rise to this minimum level. The position of long-run equilibrium would be attained when population had become adjusted to this minimum, and
thereafter total population would increase only if and as total productivity increased.
The fourth proposition should not be taken literally. Obviously
the labor market would be thrown into utter confusion if workers
making chewing gum were to be paid only enough to buy gum
while those engaged in fashioning mink coats had to be paid enough
to clothe their families in mink.
What really lies behind the proposition is the idea that wages
constitute a particularly effective form of purchasing power and
that it is this purchasing power which keeps the wheels of industry
turning. But, in fact, profits, rents, and interest also represent purchasing power, and those who receive them will normally spend

436

BUSINESS AND LABOR

them for consumer goods or turn them over to firms which will use
them for expanding productive capacity. As long as they are spent
or invested, they turn the wheels of industry just as effectively as
if they had been transferred to workers.
Some economists who recognize that profits and property incomes are purchasing power nonetheless believe that there is an
element of truth in this proposition. They reason that any given
amount of income going to wage earners re-enters the income
stream more promptly than an equal amount going to receivers of
interest, rents, and profits. These latter will save a portion, and this
will cause unemployment whenever satisfactory investment opportunities fail to materialize. They argue: the higher the proportion
of the income generated by current production distributed to wage
earners, the steadier will be the level of production and employment. True, the secular rise in the level of production and the
level of real wages will be reduced, but this is regarded as a development which, on balance, may well prove more satisfactory
to more people than one which pays for a more rapid secular advance in real incomes in the form of unnecessarily large fluctuations
in employment.
The validity of this argument rests in part on "the mature economy" thesis and in part on the assumption that there is a tendency
to chronic oversaving in the economy. Even if the argument were
valid, it would constitute only an argument in favor of income redistribution by some method, and not proof that this redistribution
should be effected by arbitrary wage-setting. Our own view is
that this fourth proposition only serves to confuse the issue and
that it has no place in a discussion of the problem of fair wages.
The other three, on the other hand, are all true when the economy
is in long-run equilibrium.
THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES IN AN ECONOMY
APPROACHING LONG-RUN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
The fact that the first three "ethical" propositions would be realized when the economy had reached long-run equilibrium does not
prove that they should prevail during the period in which the economy is approaching the equilibrium position. During the transition period they cannot all be true, and, as we shall show presently,
an attempt to impose them by law or by collective bargaining would
render more difficult the attainment of general equilibrium.
The ability-to-pay principle. Ability to pay varies from firm to
firm within the industries making up the national economy, and

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

487

from industry to industry. Some industries will be highly profitable and expanding; others will be losing money and contracting.
The resulting profits and losses allocate resources to the most efficient firms in each industry and induce them to operate at the
scales at which their marginal costs equal market prices. Profit
differentials provide the signals and the incentives which the firms
must get if the orders of the consumers are to be executed. If now
the workers in the profitable plants and the profitable industries
are able to transfer to themselves in the form of higher wages most
of the profits of the transition period, while the workers in the
unprofitable plants and the unprofitable industries are forced to
share the losses of the transition period, in the form of lower wages,
the attainment of general equilibrium will be slowed down, if not
halted entirely. During the transition period there is no place for
the ability-to-pay principle. Moreover, it is inconsistent with the
equal-pay-for-similar-work principle.
Equal pay for similar work. This is a sounder principle than the
preceding one. Even during the transitional period competition
tends to realize it within particular communities, if account is taken
of the distinction between real and equalizing wage differentials.
It does not prevail, however, as between communities.
Intracommunity wage differentials. Within single communities
there will be differences in money wages for similar work, based
upon the attractiveness of the jobs. If the work of a secretary in a
doctor's or a lawyer's office has a greater appeal than a corresponding job in a steel plant, competition will produce differences in
money wages. The more attractive jobs will pay less. Such differentials are equalizing, and there is no ethical reason for prohibiting
them.
Sometimes an apparent violation of the principle turns out to be
no violation at all. Two manufacturing plants in the same locality
may have different wage scales for identical job classifications. The
management of one plant deliberately pays wages that are low by
local standards, while the other just as deliberately aims at paying
the highest wages in the community. Superficially, the principle of
equal pay for equal work is violated. In fact, the high-wage-paying
firm attracts superior workers whose productivity is greater than
that of the workers in the other plant.
Such differentials do not violate the principle of equal-pay-forequal work. Furthermore the interests of consumers and workers
alike may be better served by separating the superior and inferior
workers than by mingling them in the same firm. This is particu-

438

BUSINESS AND LABOR

larly true where pay is by time rather than by results. Wherever
workers within a single plant are paid by time, group morale requires reasonably uniform rates of pay for given job classifications.
In fixing the rate the management must take into account the average performance, making allowance for the slow, the dull, and the
deliberate slackers in the group. Consequently superior workers
get less than they are worth and, not unnaturally, reduce their performance to the average expected of the group as a whole. This
has a demoralizing effect on them, lowers the group performance,
and hence forces the employer to lower still further his estimate
of what the work is worth. In such a situation the real redress for
the superior worker is to shift to another kind of work, perhaps a
piece-rated job within the firm, or to another firm where a higher
average level of performance and a higher average rate of pay prevails.
So far we have discussed apparent violations of the sound principle that money wages for similar work should be the same within
a single labor market area, i.e., within the area in which a worker
can change jobs without the necessity of an immediate change of
residence. Competition works constantly to enforce this principle,
and responsible collective bargaining can contribute, though it
frequently does not, to its realization.
Intercommunity wage differentials. During the transition period
there will be both real and equalizing wage differences in pay for
similar work as between communities. Market forces will progressively narrow the real differentials and with the attainment
of long-run equilibrium, they will largely disappear. The equalizing differentials, however, will remain and they will be related to
size of community.
Intercommunity wage differentials are regarded as unfair by organized labor. Increasingly, collective bargaining in the United
States is directed at their elimination as a violation of the equalpay-for-equal-work principle. It is important, therefore, to understand the reasons for their existence and the constructive role they
play in bringing the economy into its long-run equilibrium position.
Three forces are primarily responsible for the perpetuation of
equalizing wage differentials as between communities: (1) differences in local rents; (2) differences in local taxes; and (3) differences in time and expenses of getting to and from work.
(1) The rent factor. In theory as well as in fact, economic
activities can be classified as "tied" and "foot-free." The extractive
industries (farming, mining, forestry, fishing) have to be carried

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

439

on where the natural resources exist. These are the "tied" industries.
The workers employed in these industries are distributed spatially
in conformity with the physical distribution of the natural resources.
In general they live on the open land and in relatively small agricultural villages and mining towns.
The manufacturing and many service industries are relatively
"foot-free." The firms in these industries tend to locate in centers
that maximize the economies of assembling raw materials, processing them, and merchandising the finished products. Ocean and lake
harbors, strategic sites on rivers, and focal rail and road crossings
are the natural centers toward which the manufacturing, distributing and financing firms gravitate.
During the transition to equilibrium we can imagine capital and
population flowing to these low costs points as water would flow
into hollows in an uneven terrain. Diagrammatically the situation
can be represented as shown in Fig. 31-1.

FIG. 31-1

The distance between the upper dotted line and the solid wavy
line indicates the varying intensities of land use in the economy.
The low points A, B, C, D, E, F, and G are urban centers. To the
left of A and to the right of G we approach the marginal lands.
The submarginal lands lie beyond the points where the solid line
crosses and rise above the dotted line. D is the central metropolitan
city. Here the competition for land is most intense. Manufacturers,
financial houses, the great retail and wholesale establishments,
theaters, restaurants, and the employees of these establishments bid
against one another for business and residential sites. The firms
that cannot use the sites in the center of the city effectively enough
to pay the enormous rents prevailing there are forced toward the
periphery. Use districts develop in areas of equal rents: the financial district, the retail shopping district, the wholesale district, etc.
Light manufacturing can usually cling closer to the center than the
heavy industries which require more level space. In general the

440

BUSINESS AND LABOR

working population is driven to the peripheries of the city and
out into the suburban fringe lands where they have to compete
for dwelling space with intensive agriculture. A similar competition
for land goes on in each of the smaller communities, B, C, D, and
E and in the intervening rural areas.
The magnitude of rents in any locality measures the intensity of
the utilization of the land. During the transition period firms originally located in D may be forced to migrate to smaller communities
because the economic advantages of being in this largest consuming
center are not sufficient to offset the high cost of land. Moreover,
the firms that successfully meet the vigorous competition for sites
in D must also pay their employees money wages high enough to
enable them to buy or rent homes equal in their comforts and
conveniences to those available to workers in less congested communities. In brief, urban rents, though they are the result of the
commodity prices prevailing in A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, are costs to
the firms and their employees. To the firms they are expenses of
production; to the employees they are part of the cost of urban
living. It follows that a worker in D must be paid more for work
exactly similar to that performed by a worker in A, if the purchasing power of his wage is to be equal to that of the worker in A.
(2) Local taxes and other costs. Local taxes tend, like rents, to
vary according to the size of the community. This is due to the
fact that a city is, so to speak, an increasing cost enterprise. As
people gather together into larger and larger agglomerations, they
find it necessary to spend more and more for services that are not
required in smaller communities, or which can be provided at much
less expense. The costs of providing adequate space for parks,
recreation grounds, and school playgrounds in a city like New York
are enormous. The costs of adequate fire and police protection tend
to vary with and more than in proportion to the size of the community. The danger of a fire spreading to neighboring buildings
requires stricter building codes and these add to the costs of dwellings. More elaborate public health measures are needed to prevent
the spread of communicable diseases. In general the per capita
costs of comparable municipal services appear to vary directly with
and more than in proportion to the size of communities. As a consequence money incomes have to be comparably higher if the
recipients of these incomes are to be as well off, after paying local
taxes, as persons living in smaller communities and doing similar
work.
(3) The portal-to-portal premium. A third reason for inter-

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

441

community differences in money wages is that the time and cost
of getting to and from work increase with community size. Firms
in New York City are forced to draw their workers from an extensive commuting area. Many workers spend from two to three hours
daily traveling by private car or in crowded trains and buses from
their homes to their work and back. In small communities 10 to 15
minutes is apt to be more typical, and a far larger proportion of
wage earners can walk to work. Competition forces firms in big
cities to pay for the inconveniences as well as for the out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by their employees in getting to and from work.
Thus, in our theoretical model, the principle of equal real pay
for similar work requires that money wages for similar work should
vary according to the size of the communities in which firms are
located.
Causes for real differentials. During the transition period intercommunity wage differentials will be greater than can be explained
by the equalization principle. Workers in some communities will
not receive wages equal in purchasing power to those of workers of
comparable skills in other communities. These real differentials
may be due to differences in local factoral endowments. If a city
has a lower level of wages than is to be accounted for by the lower
cost of living in that city, this is proof of the fact that the capital
available to supply the working population with adequate tools is
not sufficient to put them all to work at wages comparable to those
paid in other communities.
But the differentials may also be due to the fact that the firms in
the community are in a monopsonistic position with respect to the
local labor supply. If so, a moderate and compulsory upward adjustment of wages geared fairly closely to the prevailing situation
might have a favorable employment effect.1
Regardless, however, of whether the differential is due to insufficient capital or to a monopsonistic labor market, it would be
eliminated in time by intercommunity factoral movements. The
availability of workers with given skills at low rates serves notice
on investors, on potential businessmen, on the managers of existing
businesses who are contemplating expansion programs that communities of this sort are good places in which to start new businesses. Meantime the lower rewards induce some of the young
people to move to other communities where labor is relatively
scarce, as evidenced by the higher real wages prevailing there. It
is through this two-way movement of capital into and labor out of
i See Chapter 17, p. 211.

442

BUSINESS AND LABOR

low real wage communities that the nation's "foot-free" industries
get distributed among communities of various sizes. And in the
process the real differentials are eliminated.
That some firms in low wage communities are substantially more
profitable than competitive firms in other communities does not
necessarily mean that they are exploiting either their workers or
the consumers of their products. As long as they pay the locally
prevailing wages, they have discharged their responsibility toward
their employees. As long as they charge the price that clears the
market, consumers have no justifiable complaint. If an efficiently
managed firm in a low-wage community should sell its products at
a lower price than competitors, middlemen would buy the products
and ship them to other local markets where higher prices prevailed.
It is better that the firm reap this middleman profit and use the
proceeds to expand capacity. If it still continues to enjoy exceptional profits, consumers must look to the entry of new firms into
this community for the protection of their interests.
Nor are rival firms located in large cities and forced to pay higher
wages justified in claiming that they are subject to unfair competition. They forget that there are production and distribution economies which tend to vary directly with community size. The labor
supply becomes moreflexibleas a city grows. Big cities are at nodal
transportation points and hence enjoy cost advantages in the assembling of their raw materials and the marketing of their products.
This transportation advantage is particularly important for plants
using a wide variety of raw materials which have to be brought
together from all parts of the country. Banking and credit facilities
are more developed in larger cities than in smaller ones. Interest
rates on short-term banking accommodations tend to vary inversely
with city size. The bigger a city, the more attractive it is as an
end-market; there are definite cost advantages in proximity to customers. These are some of the economies of agglomeration which
offset the wage advantage of firms located in smaller communities.
To what extent a particular plant will be able to take advantage of
them depends upon the nature of its operations. There are many
economic activities which can be carried on only in big cities; there
are others which cannot possibly survive there if the firms have to
pay the prevailing wages. In such cases relocation is in the general
interest. One of the functions of management under private enterprise is to weigh the economies which a particular city offers against
the social costs associated with that city. In such cases the competition is harsh but not unfair.

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

443

In summary, intercommunity wage differentials and the resulting
intercommunity profit differentials constitute essential parts of the
impersonal price mechanism upon which a voluntary society must
rely if it is to secure the optimum spatial distribution of its population and its capital and the most effective utilization of all its
resources.
The decency minimum principle. In 1938 the Congress of the
United States passed a law which required most nonagricultural
firms engaged in interstate commerce to pay a minimum wage of a
specified number of cents per hour. This figure was declared to be
the amount necessary to provide an unskilled worker and his family
with the income necessary for health, efficiency, and general wellbeing. We shall examine the law in some detail in the next chapter.
Here we are interested in the effects of a uniform and universal
minimum wage imposed upon all firms in our model economy prior
to the attainment of the long-run equilibrium position.
The argument against a fiat minimum. The effects of such a law
would depend upon its amount. If it were set at or below the
money wage of the marginal worker on marginal land, the direct
effect would be nil, except to the extent that the society undertook
to support a group of enforcement officers. If the uniform minimum
were set above what a substantial number of workers were worth,
it would cause a substantial amount of unemployment. No firm
would voluntarily employ a worker whose marginal productivity
fell below the legal minimum. The unemployed would now be
without any income. Ethical considerations require that the productive members of the society should tax themselves and transfer
to the unemployed at least as much as the minimum established by
the law. But even if this were done, many of the unemployed
would try to supplement their "doles" by offering to work for less
than the minimum, and many individuals and firms would find it
profitable to hire these "black-market" workers. Hence it would be
necessary to appoint and support a large group of enforcement officers. The position of the productive members of the society would
thus be worse than it would have been had they been able to devise
some method of supplementing the incomes of the submarginal
group and still allowed them to work and to contribute to the national product according to their abilities.
The more closely the uniform minimum wage approached the
competitively determined minimum wage in the biggest city in the
society, the larger would be the volume of induced unemployment
in the smaller communities. The direct effect would be nil in the

444

BUSINESS AND LABOR

central city and would reach its maximum in the rural areas. The
secondary effects would, of course, be felt throughout the society.
A universal minimum wage which rose from a low to a high according to community size would be preferable to one which disregarded community-size wage differentials.
The argument on the other side. Before leaving this topic we
should recognize a socio-economic argument in favor of the minimum wage that has some merit. The argument runs as follows: A
minimum wage which is set a little above that fixed by market
forces will cause very little immediate unemployment since employment in the short-run is determined by variable costs, not total
costs. As long as a firm can recover its variable costs it will continue to operate. The first effect of the new minimum is on the
profits of the firms paying sub-subsistence wages. Under the spur
of losses some of the affected firms will be induced to improve their
methods of production, thereby raising the marginal productivity of
their unskilled workers up to the legal minimum. Firms which
cannot make this adjustment will eventually be eliminated, but the
transfer of the workers and the resources under their control to
more able employers will increase the marginal productivity of the
unskilled and hence the total national product.
The long-run effect of the minimum will be greater than the
short-run effect but it will not be large and it will be confined to
those who, for one reason or another, are unable to contribute as
much to the national product as the public conscience deems it
desirable that they should withdraw. A minimum wage law will
lead to a clearer identification of this submarginal group and prepare the way for a more intelligent diagnosis of the causes for their
low productivity. Since an accurate diagnosis is a prerequisite to a
successful solution of any problem, the principle of a minimum can
be defended, not as an end in itself, but as a contribution to the
solution of a larger social problem.
While recognizing that there is merit in this argument, our own
conclusion is that the imposition of a legal minimum wage is more
likely to harm than to promote the cause of social justice. In any
event this argument is not applicable to a partial minimum wage
applicable to firms which in general pay higher wages than those
which are exempted.
Conclusion. Given the assumptions of pure competition, attempts
to apply the "ethical" principles discussed in this chapter would
prevent rather than promote the attainment of long-run equilibrium.
What is needed as a guide to policy making is a functional concept

WAGE POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT

445

of wages. A functionally correct structure of wages should promote
voluntary shifts of labor and capital out of contracting industries
into expanding industries, and voluntary shifts of labor out of and
capital into communities in which the marginal productivity of
labor is low because the local labor-capital ratio is unfavorable to
labor. Within particular labor market areas the general level of
wages should be such as to permit all able-bodied and willing workers to find useful employment, and the differentials between jobs
requiring different skills and aptitudes should be based on the relative scarcities of the skills involved in each particular community.
To the extent that the term "fair" is used, it should be used in connection with the wage levels and the skill differentials prevailing in
particular communities.
Community differences in wages for comparable jobs may be
equalizing or real. In neither case should these differentials be
altered by edict. If they are equalizing, the issue of social justice
is not involved. If they are real, they set in motion factoral movements which tend to correct them in a socially desirable manner.
The burden of adaptation is divided between labor and capital, and
the forces making for superurbanization are held in check.
In the next chapter we shall describe certain spatial aspects of the
American economy as it is today and then examine a few of the
more important federal interventions in the field of wages. We
shall show that these interventions have had an unfavorable effect
on the performance of the economy and upon the welfare of wage
earners taken as a whole, precisely because they are based on
allegedly "ethical" policy guides instead of on the concept of functionally sound rates.2
Questions:
1. "In many respects the economic policies of democratic governments
today are closer to those of the mercantilistic governments of the 18th
century than to those of the governments of the mid-19th century/'
2
We are not arguing that a government which uses its influence to promote a functionally sound structure of wages is stopped from intervening in other ways with a
view to reducing personal inequalities. Energetic measures aimed at the elimination
of monopoly practices, whether from the side of capital or labor, tend to reduce personal inequalities in a way that improves the over-all performance of a private enterprise economy. If public opinion insists that the government guarantee some minimum income to all American families, this could be accomplished more effectively
through fiscal policy than through wage manipulations. We shall come back to these
methods of dealing with poverty in later chapters.

446

BUSINESS AND LABOR

(a) List contemporary policies which in your judgment support the
correctness of the foregoing statement.
(b) Is the statement correct with respect to national wage policies?
(c) If not, indicate the nature of the difference and suggest reasons
for the difference.
2. Assume (a) an isolated state with considerable diversities in the way
of natural resources and climatic conditions and (b) a purely competitive enterprise system which has attained long-run equilibrium:
(a) Describe the prevailing geographical pattern of wages.
(b) Would there be any real differences in money wages for similar
work? any money differences?
(c) In what sense, if at all, could this wage pattern be called ethically sound?
(d) In the event that public opinion disapproved of any wage inequalities in the pattern, argue for or against the proposition that
arbitrary wage-setting would not be the appropriate method of correcting the situation.
3. The National Widget Corporation of America has 10 plants located
in 10 communities of very different sizes. The plants have identical
layouts and equipment, and each employs 250 men. The plants turn
out a patented product which is sold at a uniform price throughout
the United States. The Corporation is highly profitable and has been
expanding its operations for some time past. Recently the Corporation recognized the United Widget Workers of America and is engaged in negotiating a collective contract. Among the union's
demands are (1) the adoption of a uniform job classification schedule
and the payment of equal money wages for all jobs falling in the
same job classifications and (2) a 10% general increase in all wages.
The two sides have agreed to submit these two issues to an impartial
arbitrator. You are the arbitrator.
State what information you would ask the two sides to furnish and
indicate the line of reasoning you would follow in reaching a decision which you would regard as fair to the two parties directly concerned and in the general interest.
4. "Intercommunity wage differentials for similar work may be real or
equalizing."
(a) Explain the difference between real and equalizing differentials.
(b) Argue for or against the expediency of trying to eliminate real
differentials by government wage-setting or by collective bargaining.

32
National Wage Policy

J-HE writings of Frederick Jackson Turnerx have made American students of history aware of the
existence of political and historical regions in the United States, and
of the way in which national legislation reflects the divergent interests of the regions. During the 1930s Professor Howard W. Odum
of the University of North Carolina used a large number of social
and economic indices for determining the existing regional pattern.2
His regions are now used by the Office of Business Economics of
the United States Department of Commerce for measuring different
rates of economic change in different parts of the United States.
Economic analysis cannot afford to disregard the existence of
regions. Otherwise conclusions regarding the effects of public and
private interventions are likely to prove faulty.
REGIONALISM: A TOOL OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

From a sociological point of view a region is a continuous area
inhabited by a group of people who share certain loyalties which
make them feel distinct from people in other areas. In this sense
most modern nations are regions. From an economic point of view
a region is an area with a factoral endowment which differentiates
it from adjacent areas. Differences in the quantities and qualities
of the natural resources and in the amount of artificial capital per
employed person provide the primary basis for distinguishing one
economic region from another. Unless a nation is quite small it will
be found to consist of a number of economic regions. Nor are economic regions respectors of national frontiers. Much of Belgium,
1

Notably his article on "The Significance of the Frontier in American History."
First edition printed in Report of American Historical Association for 1893.
2
Southern Regions of the United States, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel
Hill: 1936.

447

448

BUSINESS AND LABOR

Luxemburg, Lorraine, the Rhur, and the Saar are parts of a single
highly industrialized region. The per capita outputs of the four
countries involved are reduced because of the political frontiers that
prevent the full realization of the potentialities of this great region.
The United States is a nation of regions. Following Odum, the
Department of Commerce recognizes seven regions in the United
States: New England, the Middle East, the Southeast, the Central
States, the Northwest, the Southwest and the Far West.3 From time
to time it rearranges national economic and social statistics with a
view to showing significant relationships between these seven
regions. The analysis in this and in the remaining chapters on
American internal problems will be based on this breakdown of the
country into regions.
These seven regions differ from one another in the proportion in
which the factors of production are available and in the rates of
internal growth or decline of the factors. These differences in factor
proportionalities result in differences in per capita outputs, per
capita incomes, and in the distribution of regional incomes among
factor owners. In other words, regional differences in factoral endowments produce regional differences in wages, interest, rents,
and profits. And these differences lead to regional specialization
and interregional trade, much of which is based on the principle of
comparative advantage.4 From a strictly technical point of view
most of the goods and services which move between regions on the
basis of differences in expenses of production could be produced in
all of the regions. In fact, however, the price mechanism tends to
assign the task of supplying the entire national market for particular goods and services to firms located in one or another of the
regions, or to divide the task between two or three of them. In
view of the alternative uses to which the resources of the seven
regions can be put it is not economical for the people in each region
to try to produce everything they could produce if they chose to
disregard opportunity costs. By specializing and trading, regional
per capita outputs and per capita real incomes are much higher
than they would be if each region aimed at self-sufficiency.
3

The most recent compilation of regional data based on the Odum classification
are to be found in Regional Trends in the United States, issued by the Office of Business Economics of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce of the United
States Department of Commerce, Govt. Printing Office, Washington: 1951.
During the 1930s the U. S. National Resources Committee and its successor, the
National Resources Planning Board published a number of valuable regional analyses, notably Regional Factors in National Planning (1935) and The Problems of a
Changing Population (1938).
4
See Chapter 25, especially pp. 327 through 331.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

449

A statistical measure of regional disparities. Per capita incomes,
despite their admitted shortcomings,5 when gathered on a regional
basis, provide us with the best single evidence of the relative well
being of the people in different parts of the United States. The
figures in Table 25-1 (p. 329) show the extent of the disparity of
regional per capita incomes in the United States in 1929 and 1947.
As was pointed out there in the discussion of these figures, the
poorer regions have been gaining steadily on the wealthier regions,
in terms of absolute rates of per capita income growth. Yet, as was
also pointed out there, because of the low base from which the
poorer regions started, the relative improvement has not prevented
a slight widening of the absolute income gap separating the poorest
from the richest regions. Yet, if the processes at work over the past
20 years continue, the disparity may very well disappear in the
next 20 to 30 years.
The scope and purpose of our inquiry. In this chapter we are
concerned with identifying the dynamic forces that would appear
to be responsible for bringing factoral rewards in different parts of
the country closer together. What we want to know is whether the
equalizing processes at work are the result of the operation of
natural market forces or of governmental interventions, or a combination of the two? There are two other possibilities to be considered. One is that market forces operated to widen the gap while
governmental interventions succeeded in overcoming this effect.
The other is that market forces would have narrowed the gap still
more had it not been for governmental interventions.
It is our purpose in this chapter to explain (1) why incomes in
the Southeast are still the lowest in the country; (2) how market
forces operate powerfully to lift these incomes closer to the national
average; (3) how the relative gain of the Southeast affects the well
being of the people in the wealthier regions; and (4) why minority
groups in those regions would benefit, in the short run, by federal
interventions that would slow down or halt entirely the processes
by which the people of the Southeast are digging out from their
present relative poverty. At the end of this chapter we shall examine the wage interventions of the Federal Government; in the
next chapter the regional effects of collective bargaining will be
considered. We want to know whether these interventions have
been responsible for the tremendous relative gains registered by the
poorer regions or whether they have prevented the gains from being as great as they might otherwise have been. We shall see that
5

See Chapter 19, pp. 226 ff.

450

BUSINESS AND LABOR

the arguments advanced in support of the interventions are primarily the ethical ones examined in the previous chapter. It will be
our assumption that the interventions represent neither good ethics
nor good economics unless it can be shown that they contribute to
regional equalization. We shall use the Southeast as our poor
region.
WHY IS THE SOUTH POOR? 6

There is, of course, no single cause for the South's poverty, and
no single, simple remedy. Five causes, however, can be identified
as being of particular importance.
1. Agrarian overemphasis. First and foremost is the fact that the
Southeast is overspecialized. No other great and populous region
has so large a proportion of its working force directly engaged in
agriculture. In 1940 for example, 20% of all those employed in the
Southeast were farm proprietors. In New England and the Middle
Atlantic states the corresponding percentages were 2 and 3. In the
Far West it was 7. The productivity of Southern man power will be
increased if several million croppers, tenants, and small farmers
operating marginal or submarginal farms can find useful off-farm
employment.7
2. Poor and eroded soils. The soils of the South are, on the
whole, mediocre. A soil survey made by the U. S. Department of
Agriculture in the mid-thirties registered the fact that there was
more first-grade land in the single state of Iowa than in the eleven
Southeastern states. Moreover these Southern lands, because of terrain, climate, and freedom from the glaciers of prehistoric times, are
older, more leached out, and more erosive than those further north.
As a result of a prolonged period of intensive cultivation to intertilled crops, they are more seriously damaged than those in anyother part of the country. Far-reaching changes in cultivation involving a great expansion of pasture and forest will be required to
restore the lands in large areas of the South. Such changes in cultivation will require a substantial reduction in the man power now
6
The answer to this question is taken with minor modifications from my article
"The Wage Problem in the New South" in The Georgia Review (1947) and this in
turn was based on a larger study, Planning for the South: an Inquiry into the Economics of Regionalism, Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville: 1943, both by J. V. Van
Sickle.
7
In the world at large and within the United States we find an invariable inverse
relationship between the agricultural emphasis and levels of real incomes. A pre-war
ranking of the nations on the basis of levels of living would show that well-being
rose as the proportion of the gainfully employed in agriculture declined. The same
holds for the United States. A ranking on the basis of state per capita incomes, as
calculated annually by the U. S. Department of Commerce, reveals the same relationship.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

451

on farms. This shift-over will depend upon the development of suitable nonfarm opportunities within or without the South.
3. A prolific population. A third complication arises from the
fact that the Southern farm population is exceptionally prolific. In
the absence of migration Southern farm population would double
every twenty-eight years if its 1935-40 reproduction rate continued.
In all parts of the country farm families more than reproduce themselves, but in the other populous regions the proportion of the farm
population is too small to offset the low birth rates in urban families.
There is thus a strong tendency for population to pile up on Southern farms despite the fact that the rebuilding of the South's farm
lands calls for an early and substantial reduction of the present
farm population.
4. "King Cotton." Another force deserves brief mention here. As
long as cotton was king in an expanding world with an almost insatiable demand for cotton to clothe a rapidly expanding population, and as long as land was plentiful and cheap, the concentration
on cotton was in accord with the principle of comparative advantage. But as cotton cultivation developed in other countries and the
lands of the South wore out, a shift of emphasis was called for. Had
it not been for the Civil War, diversification including industrialization might have gotten started much earlier than it actually did.
But defeat left the South bankrupt and Reconstruction left it embittered, humiliated, and distrustful of the Northern industrialism
which had contributed to its defeat. Consequently the agrarian
emphasis persisted well beyond the time when it represented the
best use of the region's resources. Meantime the same war had
encouraged industrialization in the North. By 1880 the industrial
pattern had taken shape that was to prevail for the next two generations. Once established, the pattern was very hard to break. The
agrarian South could not, under the Constitution, use tariffs to protect any infant industries that might get started, since their competitors would be plants located within the Union. If it were to
escape from its agrarian specialization it would have to do it without benefit of protectionism—something no independent agrarian
country had ever attempted to do.
5. Lack of capital and know-how. Since 1900 there has been a
notable change in attitude in the South toward industrialization.
In no other region is it more ardently courted, but the lack of
capital and the lack of know-how still handicap the region. Freight
rates, thin local markets, etc., may all contribute but are probably
subsidiary. During the 1920s and 1930s agricultural prices fell rela-

452

BUSINESS AND LABOR

tive to nonagricultural prices. This worsened the region's terms of
trade. Perhaps this should be listed as a sixth cause for the relative
poverty of the Southeast.
WHAT IS THE SOLUTION?
Conditions in the United States would be much more wholesome
economically, socially, and politically if the productivity of workers
of equal skill in all occupations and in all parts of the country were
equal and if the rates of pay for comparable jobs were also equal.
But how is this to be brought about?
A listing of alternatives. It can be said with confidence that the
bringing up of the earned 8 incomes of the people of the Southeast
calls for
(a) an enormous exodus of farm folk from the South (migration
solution);
(b) an enormous internal shift from farm to nonfarm pursuits involving a substantial investment of new capital (investment
solution);
(c) some combination of the two (which may be called a balanced
solution).
The problem choice. At this point a value judgment is involved.
To us, the balanced solution is the best with the emphasis on the
in-movement of new capital. It is easier and more humane to encourage large capital movements than massive movements of people.
What is needed is a steady broadening and diversifying of nonfarm opportunities in the South, a lowering of the very high birth
rate of the Southern farm population, and a steady reduction in the
human outflow until a new equilibrium is reached. At that time
there would still be interregional movements but, by and large,
the South would then attract as many ambitious youngsters as it
lost. As long as men differ in talents and interests, migration will
contribute to national well being. Meantime an enormous influx of
new capital is urgently required.
The South has been attracting this capital in the shape of manufacturing plants scattered far and wide throughout the region.
Small towns are being revitalized. The super-metropolitanism so
8
The word "earned" in the statement above is italicized to bring out the fact that
the solution should aim at the regional equalization of factoral rewards and not at
the regional equalization of personal incomes through federal grants to the poorer
states.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

453

characteristic of the Northeast is conspicuously absent. Growing
urban markets are assisting Southern farmers to diversify and revamp their one-crop economies. The urban way of life is spreading
the small family pattern throughout the rural South. The direction
and the rate of change have been encouraging.

FREE ENTERPRISE FAVORS A BALANCED SOLUTION
A dictator could reshape the economic map in short order. He
could move Southerners out or move capital in at his pleasure. How
can it be done under the limitations of a predominantly free enterprise system?
The answer, of course, is to be found in the simple words "adequate incentives." These the private enterprise system provides. In
addition the system automatically works in favor of a balanced
solution.
The role of free prices. The free enterprise system responds to
incentives as registered in free prices. Let us look for a moment at
the structure of factoral rewards that tends to emerge in the agrarian South and the industrial North if competitive market forces
are allowed to operate.
Under reasonably competitive conditions interest or the price
paid for investment funds will tend to be somewhat higher in the
South than in the wealthier parts of the country for the simple reason that local savings are scarce. Since the South needs extra
regional capital it has to pay a premium, and local savings also get
the premium.
Land is relatively cheap in the South; hence industrial land costs
are somewhat lower, but over the life of a plant this economy is not
of great importance. Local taxes are frequently less than in the
North, but in return plants get less community services. Health
and educational services in particular suffer, and these difBciencies
reduce the effectiveness of labor. Therefore, the tax advantage is
probably small. Distance from the dense high-income end-markets
of the North and East is a handicap.
Wages represent the lion's share of manufacturing costs, and it is
there that Southern industry has an advantage. The advantage is
due to the region's superabundance of unskilled and semi-skilled
labor. Most of this type of labor finds employment on farms where
labor productivity is relatively low. Consequently Southern industry can tap almost unlimited supplies of unskilled labor as long as
it is prepared to pay the premium needed to induce men and
women to shift from farm to factory. Northern plants have also to

454

BUSINESS AND LABOR

look to this labor reservoir, but, being closer to the supply, Southern plants are not obliged to pay as much as their distant competitors.
The rates for many categories of skilled labor and the pay of
many salaried groups, on the other hand, are actually higher in the
South than in older industrialized areas. And again the reason is
obvious. The Southeast relative to the older and more industrialized regions is heavily overstaffed with unskilled and semi-skilled
labor.9 Here is the fundamental reason why the foundation on
which the Southern wage structure rests—the unskilled labor ratemust be so much lower there than in other parts of the country, as
long as rewards rest on productivity and not on formula.
The relatively low wages prevailing in the South are not the
cause of the relative poverty of the region. On the contrary they
are the consequence of the relative overemphasis on agriculture.
The function of regional wage differentials. The relatively low
wage rates for unskilled and semi-skilled labor tend to attract to
the South industries that can use this type of labor effectively. The
differential enables firms to offset higher interest costs, the higher
wages for skilled and administrative workers, and distance from the
great centers of consumption. Many textile firms went South on
this basis. The production of work garments is moving South for
the same reason. In general, mass consumption goods are favored.
They have to be priced very low in order to reach the low-income
groups in the South. Any large compulsory increase in unskilled
labor rates in these industries in the South cuts down their profits,
slows down their expansion, and hence reduces the number of additional jobs they can offer. The result is more competition for jobs
in the unprotected fields, and lower money wages in the very fields
where rates of pay are the most inadequate.
The same geographical structure of prices tends to force the
North and East to specialize in the industries that make relatively
sparing use of unskilled labor—i.e., in machinery, equipment, and
finer grades of consumer goods.
Industrial expansion in the South, raising money incomes there as
9

In 1940, for example, there were 100 skilled workers in New England to every
114 unskilled workers, whereas in the Southeast there were 412.5 unskilled workers
to every 100 skilled workers. Furthermore, the proportion of the working population
classified as farm proprietors was 10 times as high in the Southeast as in New England, and a considerably larger proportion of this group in the Southeast are potential
extrants into the unskilled labor market in that region than is the case in New England. These ratios were calculated by McGraw-Hill Economics Department and published in Business Week during 1947.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

455

a result of the development of new industries, the pulling up of
rewards from the bottom, as surplus agricultural labor is drawn into
industrial production there, all this creates an increasing demand
in the South for the specialized products of the North.
In brief, market forces are changing the proportionality of the
factors in the several regions, and, as a result, per capita incomes in
all of the regions are being brought closer and closer to the national
average. The United States Department of Commerce study of
Regional Trends in the United States characterized the developments of the 20-year period 1929-49 as "little short of spectacular."
It went on to point out that "the trend of the period constituted in
effect a process of economic growth in which the disparities in the
economic status of the several regions were markedly diminished."
It found that "a prime factor" in this process "was the freedom with
which labor and new capital flowed across state lines seeking their
most advantageous use in resource or market development." 10 It
is thus apparent that, given freedom of interstate trade, a continued
reduction of regional net fertility differentials, and reasonable labor
mobility, private capitalism is capable of eliminating gross national
differences in levels of living within the United States.
But will freedom of interstate trade be permitted to operate in
the future as freely as in the past? The answer to this question is to
be sought in an understanding of the regional repercussions of the
"spectacular" developments of the recent past.
REGIONAL REACTIONS
On balance there has been a net gain from these diverse regional
developments. But the adaptations involved were frequently painful and sometimes fatal to particular enterprises in the various
regions. Resources had to be rearranged, withdrawn from fields in
which they had lost their earlier comparative advantage and reinvested in more profitable lines. Though consumers everywhere
gained, as did most firms in the older industrial regions, the owners
of specialized "sunk" capital and older and specialized workers
attached to these industries suffered.
As long as the American economy as a whole was growing
rapidly, the pains of adaptation were not too serious. Moreover,
the benefits were so widespread and so obvious that there was little
popular demand for interferences with the adaptive processes. But
with the coming of The Great Depression the over-all growth of
the American economy ceased, and for several years there was an
i° Ibid., p. 13.

456

BUSINESS AND LABOR

absolute contraction. Firms everywhere sought to make economies
and particularly in their wage costs. In the established industrial
regions these latter costs proved more difficult to bring down than
was the case in the Old South. There were several reasons for this.
One was the higher degree of trade unionism. The unions held up
wages at the expense of employment. Many of those who lost their
jobs had come from the farms of the South, and they now returned
to their old homes to add themselves to the surpluses that were
rapidly building up there due to the cessation of emigration. As a
result there developed a tremendous competition for jobs in the
South, and rates broke there much more than in the North. This
widened North-South wage differentials and greatly increased the
South's power to attract extraregional investment capital. While
the rest of the country stood still, industrial expansion continued in
the South. Instead of enjoying, as in the past, a somewhat more
than proportionate share of the country's general industrial growth,
it now appeared to be gaining at the expense of enterprise and employment in the other regions. It is not surprising that labor and
capital outside of the Old South regarded this development with
misgivings and that the charge should be made that Southern business was exploiting Southern labor.
It is against this background that we shall examine the wage
policies of the federal government and recent developments in collective bargaining. The measures we shall be concerned with are
(1) the federal government's wage policy with respect to its own
employees; (2) its policy with respect to firms from which it buys
goods and services; (3) its policy with respect to firms engaged in
interstate commerce; and (4) the policies of national unions.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S OWN WAGE POLICY

The federal government is the largest employer of labor in the
United States. As of late 1952 it had on its civilian payroll some
2 million persons and disbursed in wages and salaries more than $8
billion annually. Less than 10% of these civilian employees worked
in Washington; the rest were scattered throughout the country, in
cities and towns ranging in size from metropolitan New York City
to tiny hamlets of a few hundred inhabitants. In most, if not in all
states, federal employees outnumber state employees.
This dominant position is a matter of very recent origin. It is the
result of the "peaceful revolution" which began in 1933, and which
has shifted more and more functions to Washington. In part, this

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

457

expansion of federal functions represents a delayed recognition of
the fact that government has a large role to play in creating the
kind of environment in which a private enterprise system can perform responsibly.11
Wages and salaries in the federal services are fixed on the basis
of an elaborate classification which takes account of such things as
skills, responsibilities, and seniority. In general, rates of pay for
similar work in the different services are equal. Conspicuously
absent, however, are the regional and locality differentials so characteristic of the private sector of the economy. A postman of a
given grade with a given number of years of service gets the same
rate of pay, whether he works in Meridian, Mississippi, or Meriden,
Connecticut, or Chicago, Illinois. A federal judge in a rural district
in the South, with a light case load and plenty of time for hunting
and fishing and the maintenance of a lucrative private business, gets
the same salary as a judge of equal rank in New York City or
Detroit, who has to devote his full time to the work of his office.
And so it goes through the whole range of civil service jobs.
Not only have rates for given job classifications long been uniform throughout the country, but in general they have been higher
than the rates paid by state and local governments and by private
enterprise to employees doing similar work.12
This policy has a number of awkward consequences. (1) In the
first place it militates against an efficient personnel promotion program. It is not easy to get federal employees to move from small
communities to larger communities on the basis of the small pro11
Whether this expansion has in fact strengthened or weakened the system would
appear to depend on the answers to these four questions:
(1) Have the public interventions been of the sort called for by the laissez-faire
analysis? (To avoid misunderstanding the reader should recall the meaning we have
attached to the term laissez-faire analysis. It is a method of reasoning which tells
us not only what the State should not do but also what it should do to realize "the
assumptions" of laissez-faire. See Chapter 20, pp. 242 ff.
(2) Have they been assigned to the appropriate levels of government?
(3) Have the methods of raising the revenues needed to defray the costs of administering the public interventions respected or disregarded the incentives upon
which a private enterprise system depend?
(4) Does government accept the level of rewards prevailing in the private competitive sector of the economy when it buys resources and hires labor?
We shall seek answers to the first three questions in later chapters. Our concern
here is with the fourth question and only as it relates to the federal government,
since in general the states and their political subdivisions are forced to accept the
verdict of the market.
12
For the supporting evidence see "Federal Spending Facts," The Council of
State Chambers of Commerce, Bulletin No. 87, July 30, 1951.

458

BUSINESS AND LABOR

motions which would suffice if, as is the case in most European
countries, the wage and salary classification schedules recognized
size-of-community differentials. (2) A second consequence of the
uniformity principle is the unnecessary increase in total federal payroll costs and hence in the level of federal taxes. (3) Another and
more subtle consequence is to be found in the field of attitudes. In
most communities a stenographer in private employment finds it
difficult to understand why she should get less than her best friend
who holds a federal job. The situation is particularly acute in
smaller communities. (4) A further consequence of the federal
government's policy is that it creates a precedent which reduces the
ability of private employers to oppose the extension of the uniformity principle in the private sector of the economy.
THE WALSH-HEALEY ACT 13
In 1935 the Congress of the United States passed the Public Contracts Act, better known as the Walsh-Healey Act. This act vests
in the Secretary of Labor the power to establish wages, hours, and
working conditions for employees engaged on federal contracts involving more than $10,000.00. The Congress held that the federal
government should not only be a model employer itself, but should
withhold its patronage from employers whose rates of pay and employment policies fail to measure up to a federally imposed standard.
The pertinent paragraph of the law reads as follows:
Not less than the minimum wages as determined by the Secretary of
Labor to be the prevailing minimum wages for persons employed on similar work or in the particular or similar industries or groups of industries
currently operating in the locality in which the materials, supplies, articles or equipment are to be manufactured or finished under said contract.

Despite statements of the sponsors of the Act that the "prevailing
minimum" was to be interpreted in the "locality" sense, i.e., as equal
to that prevailing for similar jobs in the community where the work
was actually performed, the Secretary of Labor has successfully
imposed a single uniform rate in all but a handful of industries.
This rate is higher than that required by competitive conditions in
13
More detailed accounts of this act are to be found in Reilly, Haslam and Modley,
"The Threat of the Walsh-Healey Act," Harvard Business Review, January, 1951,
and John V. Van Sickle, "The Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act," National Economic Problem Series, No. 445, American Enterprise Association, New York: 1952.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

459

hundreds of smaller communities, and usually substantially higher
than that imposed on firms engaged in interstate commerce.14
If our analysis of the role of industrial and locality wage differentials is correct, it is clear that this Act, as presently administered,
is inconsistent with the operating requirements of the kind of enterprise system it is allegedly designed to improve. In short, it represents a Congressional expression of distrust with the operation of
market forces.

THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT
Three years after the passage of the Walsh-Healey Act the Congress passed the Fair Labor Standards Act. This measure empowers
the federal government to prohibit the sale in interstate markets of
goods and services produced by firms paying less than a stipulated
minimum wage expressed in cents per hour and declared to be that
required to provide an unskilled worker with the income necessary
to "health, efficiency, and general well being." It further requires
the payment of time and one-half on hours worked in excess of 40
per week, prohibits the employment of children under 16, and establishes certain minimum standards regarding working conditions.15 Agricultural workers, domestic servants, and firms not
engaged in interstate commerce are specifically excluded from the
Act.
The original rate was 25 cents an hour with provision for bringing the rate up to 40 cents an hour, within a seven-year period,
industry by industry, on the basis of recommendations of industry
committees appointed by the Secretary of Labor. During the transition period size-of-city differentials could be authorized by the
14
The Secretary appears to have relied upon the following complicated interpretation supplied by one of his legal experts:
The prevailing minimum wages for persons employed on similar work is an alternative which stands on its own feet, and even though the term "similar work" is not
followed by a comma in the text, the word "or" following the term nevertheless acts
as a complete disjunctive; and, because of change in the verbal sequence from a
substantive verb ("similar work") to pure substantives ("industries") after the last
pure substantive ("groups ot industries") cannot strike back to modify "similar
work." The present participle ("operating"), on the other hand, readily reaches
through "groups of industries" to "similar industries" and to the particular industry because there is no barrier to halt it. Its influence cannot pass beyond this point, however,
because the change in the grammatical structure obstructs it.
15
For reasons not clear to the writers a girl between the ages of 16 and 18 may
work for a firm engaged in interstate commerce, provided the firm is not also engaged
on a Walsh-Healey contract. In that event she must be 18 years old. There are also
minor but vexatious differences between the two laws with respect to over-time,
safety and health provisions, and the kind of records firms must keep and the period
of time they must be preserved for federal inspection officers.

460

BUSINESS AND LABOR

industry committees under narrowly defined conditions. Regional
differentials were expressly prohibited. In 1949 the minimum was
raised to 75 cents an hour, coverage was broadened somewhat, and
the provisions for locality differentials was eliminated. The Act lays
down a single minimum wage figure which is uniform throughout
the United States but applicable to only a minority of firms and
precisely to that minority which already pay the highest wages in
the states in which they are located.
The preamble of the Act declares that low wages and long hours
affect the health, efficiency, and general well being of employees,
constitute unfair methods of competition, cause labor disputes,
strikes, and interference with the orderly and fair marketing of
goods in interstate commerce.16
The case for and against a universal and uniform minimum wage
was discussed in the preceding chapter. We indicated there that a
universal minimum wage is not an appropriate device for raising
the real wages of unskilled workers. Does a partial minimum wage,
one which applies to only a fraction of the labor force, deserve a
more favorable verdict?
We can imagine a partial minimum wage law based on regional
and size of community wage differentials which would be reasonably innocuous.17 But the law here under examination definitely
rejects this principle. Regional differentials are explicitly prohibited, and those charged with its administration consistently refused, even during the seven-year transition period, to approve of sizeof-community differentials. The law imposes a single uniform rate
upon all firms subject to its jurisdiction. Now the setting of a single
uniform rate must necessarily be reached by a political compromise
between the representatives of the large cities and the representatives of the smaller communities and the rural areas. The former
cannot be expected to go back home and say that they have voted
for a rate that has no relevance whatever to the competitivelv determined minimum actually prevailing in their constituencies. The
end-result is a figure that affects a small fringe of employers in high
16
Thus a small lumber mill deliberately selling entirely within a state and employing local farm help was held to be liable if "the employer intends, hopes, or has
reason to believe that his product will eventually move in interstate commerce." In
Meridian, Mississippi, m the early 1940s there were only two office buildings with
elevators. The elevator operator in one of these buildings was covered by the Act
because there was a lawyer on the top floor who had clients who were engaged in
interstate commerce. The operator of the elevator in the other building was not
covered.
17
Such differentials were recognized in the PWA program of the early 1930s.

NATIONAL WAGE POLICY

461

wage areas and is considerably higher than firms located in small
communities are required to pay for comparable services. As a
consequence these smaller communities become less attractive as
locations for firms engaged in interstate commerce. The mobility of
capital is reduced. An unnecessarily large out-movement of population from low-wage and low-levels-of-living areas must occur if
the sound principle of equal real pay for comparable work is to be
realized.18
To sum up, our verdict regarding the Fair Labor Standards Act
is the same as our verdict regarding the Walsh-Healey Act. It is
inconsistent with the operating requirements of the very kind of
economic system it is supposed to foster. Doubtless the majority of
its supporters sincerely believe that it promotes social justice. In
fact, however, it serves to protect the wealthy regions against the
poor regions, and higher paid workers against lower paid workers,
by depriving the latter of the possibility of attracting the capital
needed to make them more productive in the localities in which
they happen to be born and to which they may be attached by
strong and respectable sentiments. Instead of making capital more
mobile than labor, this law requires of workers a degree of mobility
that is economically and socially undesirable.
Questions:
1. Define the concept "proportionality of factors" and use it to explain
why per capita incomes in the Southeast are the lowest in the United
States.
2. Identify (a) what is called in the text "a balanced solution" of the
low-income problem of the South; (b) the value judgment that lies
behind it; and (c) set forth the reasoning in support of the assertion
that market forces tend to promote a "balanced solution."
3. Defend or rebut the following propositions:
(a) "The federal government's own wage policy is inconsistent with
the operating requirements of a competitive market economy."
(b) "The Walsh-Healey Act represents a Congressional expression
of distrust with the operation of market forces."
(c) "The Fair Labor Standards Act in effect constitutes a form of
protective tariff in favor of the wealthy regions and at the expense
of the poorer regions."
18
The factual evidence to support this deductive reasoning will be found in John
V. Van Sickle's "Geographical Aspects of a Minimum Wage,' Harvard Business Review, Spring, 1946.

462

BUSINESS AND LABOB

4. "The remarkable industrial development of the Southeast since the
passage of the Walsh-Healey Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, and
the spread of unionism proves that these measures have increased
purchasing power there and have therefore helped and not hurt that
region." Argue for or against the economic soundness of this statement.

33
Collective Bargaining

LJ NDER trade unionism the wage
contract is the result of a collective contract between an employer
and a group of workers. The opposite of collective bargaining is
individual bargaining. Pure competition assumes individual bargaining. In fact, under pure competition there could be no bargaining by firms or workers since any other rate than the prevailing rate
would be contrary to the interests of both parties. The problem
that interests us here is the effect of collective bargaining on what
we have called effective competition, or workable competition. We
assume here that the people of the United States wish to maintain
an effectively competitive enterprise system. Is collective bargaining consistent with this kind of an economic system?
Some definitions. Collective bargaining may be done for all of
the employees of a plant by a single union, or there may be several
unions, each catering to a specialized group of workers. The first
type of bargaining agency is usually called an industrial union, the
second a craft union. A union is closed or open, according as it
restricts membership or admits all qualified workers. A union with
unreasonably high admission dues stands somewhere between a
closed and an open union. Where a union requires prior membership as a condition of employment in a particular plant we have
what is known as a closed shop. Where the management may hire
anyone it pleases, provided the worker agrees to join the union
within a specified period of time, we have a union shop and, by
definition, the union itself is "open." There is fairly general agreement that a closed shop with a closed union represents a form of
labor monopoly that is inconsistent with the requirements of a competitive enterprise system. The closed shop with an open union
possesses much less monopoly power, provided its terms of admis463

464

BUSINESS AND LABOR

sion are reasonable.1 Local unions, whether organized by crafts or
by industries, belong to national unions. The amount of local autonomy enjoyed by the locals varies greatly from national union
to national union in the United States. Most but not all of the great
national unions are in turn affiliated with either the American Federation of Labor (AFL) or the Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO).
There is company-wide bargaining when a single national union
represents and bargains for all or most of the men in all of the
plants belonging to a single firm. When a national union represents
and bargains for the workers in all or most of the firms belonging
to a single industry, we have industry-wide bargaining. The negotiations may or may not be carried on simultaneously with representatives of all the firms. Identical demands may be made against
all the firms, or less onerous terms may be agreed to for some in
recognition of differences in capacity to pay. Recently the term
pattern bargaining has come into use in connection with the negotiations of a single union with one of a number of firms with which
it has contracts. Having reached agreement with this firm, the
union then makes comparable demands on the others. The tendency under company-wide and industry-wide bargaining is toward
greater wage uniformity in all of the plants involved in the collective contract.
The legal evolution of unionism. Until about one hundred years
ago collective bargaining was against the law in all of the American
states. It was treated as "collusion" or conspiracy. Federal law was
silent on this issue, which was regarded as exclusively a matter of
state concern. First Massachusetts, and then other states, permitted
workers to form unions, provided they refrained from the use of
force. During this period collective bargaining enjoyed the status
of a liberty. Men were free to join a union or to refrain, and managements were equally free to recognize or not to recognize the
union. State courts were generous in the use of the injunction
whenever the strategy of a union was alleged by managements to
threaten property losses for which there could be no adequate recovery through a suit for civil damages against the union or the
individual members. In 1890 both labor and management were
subjected to the anti-monopoly and restraint-of-trade provisions of
the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. Thereafter, the federal courts were
1

The power to exact an economically high wage reduces the profitability of hiring
extra workers; it thus restricts the opportunity of less-well-paid workers to better
their positions in much the same way as does a restriction on membership.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

465

fairly free in issuing injunctions against unions when their bargaining tactics interfered with interstate commerce or appeared to be
aimed at obtaining a labor monopoly. At the insistence of organized labor a provision was inserted into a 1914 amendment of the
Sherman Act (the Clayton Act) which declared that "labor was not
a commodity." This declaration had little effect, however, on the
federal courts.
In 1932, the Congress passed the Norris-LaGuardia Act which
severely limited the right of managements to appeal to the federal
courts for injunctions against anticipated damages. Three years
later, with the passage of the National Labor Relations Act, popularly known as the Wagner Act, the Congress formally recognized
unionism as a right. This was a far-reaching change. Henceforth
managements were required to bargain collectively whenever the
majority of their employees, in properly conducted elections, voted
in favor of this method of negotiating.. The law further listed a
number of management practices as unfair and hence illegal. In
1947 the law was amended 2 to include in its list of prohibitions a
number of union practices. Among other things the closed shop
was prohibited. A move to prohibit industry-wide collective bargaining was narrowly defeated. The right of appeal to the federal
courts was restored to a limited degree. The federal government,
but not a private firm, could seek a 75-day injunction against a
union in the event that a strike was held by the President "to imperil the national health or safety." If a peaceful solution was not
reached during this cooling-off period, the union regained the right
to use the weapon of the strike and the President was required to
submit to the Congress a comprehensive report and recommendations for appropriate action.
The growth of trade unionism. During the 20 years following the
passage of the Norris-LaGuardia Act the growth in the number of
union-dues-paying workers employed under collective contracts has
been phenomenal. In 1932, which marked the low ebb of union
power, membership stood at less than 2 million; at the end of 1951
between 15-16 millions, or close to one-third of the nonagricultural
labor force, were enrolled in unions. The independent union confined to a single plant or company has practically disappeared from
the scene. The nonunion shop is now the exception rather than
the rule in larger business enterprises. Most of the mass production
industries, the railroads, the trucking industry, the coal mines, print2

The Labor Management Relations Act, better known as the Taft-Hartley Act.

466

BUSINESS AND LABOR

ing, the communication services, and, in addition, textiles, the garment and building trades, and the larger commercial establishments
are now organized. Only in the Old South and in quite small communities in other parts of the country is unionism still the exception.
The funds in union treasuries are substantial. In 1951 the national unions and the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organization were reported to control more than
two billion dollars in assets.3 These assets are over and above the
substantial resources under the control of the thousands of locals.
Through special assessment large additional sums can be raised at
short notice.
The case for collective bargaining. Under individual bargaining
the ordinary worker has to take or leave what the employer offers.
To the employer it is usually a matter of very little moment whether
a particular worker agrees or refuses to work for him on the terms
he is willing to offer. To the worker, who seldom has much waiting power, a job means bread and butter and a roof over his head.
Under collective bargaining employers as well as workers are confronted with an all-or-nothing choice, and the funds in the union
treasury provide the members with a waiting power which may
equal or exceed that of the employer.
The alleged helplessness of the individual worker in his bargaining with a large employer explains the widespread approval of
unionism in the United States today. It is supposed to equalize
the bargaining power of the two parties. In fact, however, workers
as a whole are in a very good bargaining position with respect to
wages in a society in which the rate of capital formation exceeds
the rate of population growth. This has been the case with only
occasional interruptions in the United States from the beginning of
our history. The great wage gains of American labor are due to this
fact and not to collective bargaining. The case for collective bargaining cannot be made on this score.
Little historical evidence that unions have increased wages. Between 1849 and 1939 hourly real wages in American manufacturing
plants rose more than fourfold. (During this period the value of
the capital behind each worker increased ninefold, from $557 to
$5,080.) Labor's share of the gross value of output, as far back as
the records go, fluctuated within very narrow limits. Between 1900
and 1940 it rose once to 17.9 percent and fell three times to 16 per3
Victor Riesel, Indianapolis Star, December 21, 1951. Riesel is a newspaper man
who specializes on labor issues and appears to enjoy the confidence of organized labor.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

467

cent, and once to 15.6 percent. At the beginning of the period it
was 17.2 percent; at the end it was down to 16 percent.4 There was
very little collective bargaining in 1900 while it was very widespread in 1939. Working with other figures, Professor Sumner
Slichter of Harvard University concluded that, during the period
1880 to 1930, labor's real wage rose more rapidly in periods when
organization was weak than when it was strong.5 Senator and
former Professor Paul H. Douglas in his study of wages in the
United States concluded that "when labor organization becomes
effective, it yields very appreciable results in its early stages but
that thereafter the rate of gain enjoyed by its members tends to
slow down to a speed which does not appreciably exceed that of
the nonunion industries." 6
That unionism has not appreciably increased labor's share in the
national income does not prove that it serves no useful purpose. It
does prove, however, that the case must be made on other grounds.
Such a case, in our opinion, can be made, but on social and psychological rather than economic grounds. Unions are very human
associations through which millions of individuals, uprooted from
the land, herded together in the anonymous barracks of great cities,
seek to regain the sense of personal status, and thereby escape from
the disintegrating feeling of being mere interchangeable cogs in a
vast and impersonal machine. The cry "our labor is not a commodity" uses the language of the market place to assert the dignity
of the human personality. Moreover, the union, at its best, introduces "due process" into labor-management relations. The scope
for arbitrary and capricious action is narrowed. Those clothed with
the responsibility of hiring, firing, promoting, and disciplining the
work force have to follow mutually agreed upon procedures laid
down in written contracts. Enlightened business management has
discovered that it can handle its personnel problems much better
through the representatives of the men, rather than through individual dealings. These representatives must have the confidence
of the men, which means that they must be freely chosen by the
workers themselves. In such an atmosphere of mutual confidence
management can and has tapped unexpected resources in the way
4

Willford I. King, "Raising the Working Man's Scale of Living," Committee for
Constitutional Government, Inc., New York: 1945.
5
Slichter's position appears in a dissenting footnote in Trends in Collective Bargaining, Twentieth Century Fund Study, 1945, p. 218.
6
Real Wages in the United States 1890 to 1926, Houghton Mifflin & Co., Boston:
1930, p. 562.

468

BUSINESS AND LABOR

of loyalty and of productive ideas.7 In such an environment, it is
safe to predict, the vast majority of the workers will want to belong
to the union.
The need for restraints. The power of organized labor in politics
and in certain fields is now such that Professor Sumner Slichter of
Harvard University has recently characterized the American economy as "laboristic" 8 in the sense that the balance of private power
has shifted from the suppliers of capital to those who control the
supply of labor.
The crippling strikes which have repeatedly brought the entire
economic life of the nation perilously close to a standstill provide
abundant evidence of the need for legal restraints on union power.
The industries that were closed down were not the low-paying ones,
so that it cannot be argued that they were "exploiting" their workers. They were already paying wages which would have enabled
them to replace the strikers and to continue operations had it not
been for the intimidating picket lines thrown round their plants
and their insulation from the protecting "injunction" power of the
courts. Nor is there any evidence that they were exploiting the
consumer. The competition of substitutes and the march of technological progress drastically limit control of the market by business. Certainly American business does not now possess, and it is
doubtful whether it ever did possess, the crippling power now
wielded by some of our great unions.
Suggested restraints. The propriety of the trade union is acknowledged. It is clear, however, that recent federal legislation has expanded organized labor's rights without correspondingly extending
its responsibilities. Its control of the labor supply has clothed the
union with a public interest. The "rule of reason" should apply
to union activities as well as to those of corporations. Federal and
state laws should provide that union qualifications for membership
be reasonably related to the job skills involved, and that union dues
be directed to the fulfillment of the union's lawful activities. The
requirement that union and corporate funds should not be used
7

For a vivid account of the transformation produced by a shift from an anti-union
to a pro-union policy on the part of management, see William F. Whyte, Pattern for
Industrial Peace, Harper & Bros., New York: 1951.
Most of the above favorable appreciation of the possibilities of unionism is taken
with small verbal changes from John V. Van Sickle, Planning for the South: An Inquiry into the Economics of Regionalism, Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville:
1943, p. 24.
8
Sumner H. Slichter, The American Economy, Its Problems and Prospects, Alfred
A. Knopf, New York: 1948.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

469

to support a political party should be enforced with impartial
severity. Full publicity of audited accounts should be required of
unions as it is of corporations. The State should see to it that genuinely democratic processes are scrupulously observed in the election of union officers and in the formulation of union policy. The
existing ban on the closed shop should be continued. Law and
order and the right to work should be enforced at all times and in
all places. This is equivalent to saying that the right to strike does
not involve the right to use violence on the picket line. The union
like the corporation should again be made liable to federal antitrust laws.9
Industry-wide bargaining and the problem of power. In a cele-

brated article which appeared in 1944, the late Professor Henry C.
Simons of the University of Chicago declared flatly that private
capitalism and trade unionism, as it had developed in this country
and in Western Europe, were incompatible and that one or the
other would have to go.
For my part [he observed] I simply cannot conceive of any tolerable or
enduring order in which there exists widespread organization of workers
along occupational, industrial, functional lines. . . . In an economy of
intricate division of labor, every large organized group is in a position at
any time to disrupt or to stop the whole flow of social income; and the
system must soon break down if groups persist in exercising that power
or if they must continuously be bribed to forego its disastrous exercise.
There is no means save internal competition, to protect the whole community against organized labor minorities and, indeed, no other means to
protect the common interests of organized groups themselves.10
It is to be doubted whether a democratic society can destroy the
right of men to join unions. Any government that could success9

The suggestions above are taken from Van Sickle, Planning for the South, pp.

35-6. In this connection it is worth noting how radically the position of the Supreme
Court with respect to Big Business and Big Labor has altered since the days when
it applied the penalties of Anti-Trust rather drastically against labor and quite sparingly against business. In 1945 it will be recalled (American Tobacco Co. v. United
States) it held that it was not necessary that the power (to control the prices of commodities moving in interstate commerce) should be exercised. "Its existence is sufficient." When the Court thus holds that the Federal Trade Commission may enjoin
business practices which might restrain interstate trade, even though in fact they
have not been so used, it is surely time to apply the same rule to union practices which
have repeatedly interfered with interstate trade. The survival of democracy may
well depend upon restoration of respect for the democratic principle of equality before the law.
10
"Some Reflections on Syndicalism," Journal of Political Economy, March, 1944;
and later reprinted in Simons' Economic Policy for a Free Society, Univ. of Chicago
Press, Chicago: 1947.

470

BUSINESS AND LABOR

fully ban unionism would be the kind of government that would
threaten all democratic processes. Wherever unionism has been
destroyed, democracy and private enterprise have also been destroyed. They are all in the same boat.
Perhaps the measures suggested in this section will suffice to
give us the type of responsible unionism under which a dynamic
and progressive enterprise system can flourish. But, if not, it may
be necessary to ban industry-wide bargaining, for it is this aspect
of trade unionism which aroused Professor Simons' misgivings.
Control of the entire labor supply of an industry gives trade union
leaders more power than can wisely be left in private hands. This
power is used to promote the kind of wage uniformity without regard to region or size of community which we have shown to be
contrary to the operating requirements of the private enterprise
system in a country as vast and diversified as the United States.
Furthermore it appears to promote cartel-like arrangements among
the firms that are forced in self-defense to join together to resist
excessive union demands. And the next step is then very easy—a
joint labor-management agreement to restrict the entry of new
firms and additional workers into the industry and to pass on the
costs to the hapless consumer. This appears to have been the road
down which Great Britain traveled in the years between the first
and the second World Wars. If trade unionism in the United
States follows the same road, then Professor Simons' flat assertion
of the incompatibility of private capitalism and trade unionism
may prove to be correct, and the American people will be faced
with a difficult choice.
Big Business and Big Labor. Anyone who proposes that the territorial jurisdiction of our national unions be limited is immediately
asked, "Are you prepared to propose the same medicine for Big
Business?" The authors have indicated in the chapters on Effective
Competition and on Government and Business why they do not
regard "bigness" in business as a threat to our democratic institutions. So long as our giant corporations compete for the consumers' dollar, their power is limited. From a purely economic point
of view the two problems are not comparable. Politically, however,
the argument that the two types of bigness shall be accorded equal
treatment is very strong. All that the authors can say as citizens is
that they would be prepared to see government impose some limitations on bigness in business if that is the political price that has
to be paid for securing limitations on the power of some of our
great national unions.

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

471

WAGE DETERMINATION UNDER MONOPSONY
AND OLIGOPSONY

Before concluding this chapter there is need to consider the claim
that the prevalence of business monopoly in the hiring of labor
justifies minimum wage laws and union bargaining practices which
could not possibly be justified in an economy operating under more
competitive conditions.
It is true that a firm that is the exclusive or principal hirer of
labor faces a rising labor supply curve. The management's decision to expand employment involves the payment of higher wages
not only to the additional workers, but to all those previously ememployed. Under such circumstances the optimum employment,
from the point of view of the firm, is reached when the additional
revenue earned as a result of employing one more worker just
equals the total addition to labor costs as a result of employing
him. This optimum employment figure is less than would have been
the case had the competition in the labor market been such as to
force the firm to pay higher wages regardless of whether it did or
did not expand output. A general wage increase, imposed by law
or by collective bargaining, would, under these special circumstances, make it profitable for the firm to hire more workers than
it would have hired in the absence of the imposed wage increase.
This does not mean that the imposed wage increase would increase
the firm's profits. Profits would be reduced, but the reduction
would be still greater if the firm failed to increase employment to
the new and larger optimum employment figure.
This theory is frequently used to support the measures discussed
in this and the preceding chapters. Does it call for any modification of our unfavorable conclusions? We believe not.
In the first place, the conditions which would justify an upward
manipulation of wages always occur in particular labor market
areas. The minimum wage which would increase employment in
one labor market area would cause unemployment in another. The
minimum would have to be tailored to the precise conditions in
each labor market area, if the law was to have beneficial over-all
employment effect. Except in periods of fairly rapid inflation a uniform minimum wage law is bound, on balance, to create more unemployment than employment.
A Walsh-Healey wage determination tailored to the conditions
prevailing in the communities where the successful bidders actually
produced the products purchased by federal agencies could con-

472

BUSINESS AND LABOR

ceivably have a beneficial employment effect. It is very doubtful,
however, whether any administrative officer could possibly discover the appropriate wage. In any event the Labor Department
has refused to explore this possibility despite the fact that the Act
apparently calls for locality wage determinations.
Collective bargaining geared to local conditions could, from a
theoretical point of view, have a favorable employment effect.
This is one reason for our conviction that it is possible to have
workable unionism and workable capitalism. But if the trend
toward industry-wide bargaining continues, the chances of its having this favorable effect become progressively less.
In conclusion it is important to note that the theory is applicable
to essentially short-run situations. Let us admit, for the sake of the
argument, that a fiat wage increase in a particular community
would have an immediately beneficial effect on employment. The
workers are being "exploited," in the sense that they get less than
their marginal value product. But how long can this exploitation
last, particularly in this country where good roads and plenty of
cheap cars give workers very considerable mobility? The exploiting firm will soon find that it is losing workers to firms in near-by
communities. It is in potential competition with all firms within
commuting distance. Its ability to exploit is very limited as long
as the general demand for labor in this commuting area is high.
The mobility of capital further limits the time during which it can
exploit the local worker. If the firm itself does not expand, outside
capital is likely to come in to take advantage of the low wages.
This refinement of wage theory provides no support for the wage
policies here under review. On the contrary, it would justify even
more drastic limitations on the territorial jurisdiction of a union
than those we have suggested. Specifically the theory leads to
the conclusion that the determination of a minimum wage and the
control of unions should be returned to the states and that the
federal government, which almost of necessity must apply uniform
rules, should confine itself to the suppression of efforts to interfere
with interstate commerce by the vigorous and impartial enforcement of the anti-trust laws against business and labor.
Questions:
1. Trace the legal evolution of trade unionism in the United States and
cite the principal federal measures that resulted in the transformation
of collective bargaining from a "liberty" to a "right."

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

473

2. What is the difference between a liberty and a right?
3. "Industry-wide collective bargaining tends to produce a geographical
pattern of wages that is functionally unsound." Explain the economic reasoning behind this statement.
4. Argue for or against the following proposition: "Equity requires that
any territorial limitations on the jurisdiction of a trade union should
be accompanied by a corresponding territorial limitation on the operations of a corporation, i.e., if a union's operations should be limited
to a single state, the same rule should apply to a business corporation." (Incidentally this rule does apply to private banking corporations. )
5. Discuss critically the economic validity of the following proposition:
"Since standardized products sell in all local markets at substantially
the same price regardless of where they are produced, it follows that
those who make these products should get substantially the same
rates of pay/'
6. Define monopsony and oligopsony. Argue for and against the following proposition: "If monopsony and oligopsony are widespread in the
American economy, a uniform national minimum wage and industrywide collective bargaining can actually increase both wages and employment."

PART SEVEN

Agriculture

34
American Farm Problem

AN THE two preceding chapters we
described and analyzed the far-reaching measures in the field of
labor-management relations enacted during the 1930s and 1940s.
These measures could not have been passed without the support of
both the labor and the farm vote. The farmers had to be given
something to offset the unfavorable effects of the labor legislation
on their interests. It is not surprising, therefore, that the interventions in the agricultural field were equally far-reaching. They
virtually exempted the American farmer from the necessity of competing for the consumers' dollars. The industry in which conditions
most closely approximated those of pure competition was converted
almost overnight into an industry clothed by the federal government with monopoly power. In addition large sums were taken
from the nonfarm population to raise the money incomes of farmers
and to pay them for observing restrictions on output.
This farm program will be described and appraised in the next
chapter. Our interest in this chapter is in noting the extent to
which farm incomes had lagged behind nonfarm incomes and in
identifying the forces which are said to be responsible for the lag
and for the inability of farmers to adjust their operations to the
ups and downs of the business cycle. In addition we shall consider
certain developments of the period 1910-1929 that may have been
responsible for the very serious situation of the farm population on
the eve of the 1932 Presidential elections.
FARM versus NONFARM INCOMES: 1929

The accompanying estimates of 1929 per capita farm and nonfarm incomes for the United States as a whole and for various parts
477

478

AGRICULTURE

of the United States are based on a Brookings Institution study
which appeared in 1934.
AVERAGE PER-CAPITA INCOMES, FARM AND NONFARM
BY REGIONS, 1929 *

General
Average
United States
Northeast
Middle States
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Far West

$750
881
715
590
365
564
921

Average for Average for Ratio Farm
Nonfarm
Farm
to Nonfarm
Population Population
Income
$908
946
854
703
535
683
953

$273
366
262
426
183
366
818

0.301
.387
.307
.607
.342
.535
.858

* Source: These figures are taken from National Resources Committee, Changing
Population, p. 43; and are based on estimates for separate states in America's Capacity
to Consume (Brookings Institution, 1934).

The income gap had actually widened during the 1920s. Only
in the Far West did farm incomes approximate nonfarm incomes.
This enormous disparity existed at the end of a long period of
growth. This fact must be kept in mind when we come to examine
the New Deal in agriculture.
At the same time we should recognize that the figures exaggerate
the extent of the disparity between farm and nonfarm levels of
living. There are several reasons for this. In the first place, dollar
income figures necessarily underestimate the value of the goods
and services produced and consumed within the farm household.
In the second place that part of a farmer's money earnings derived
from off-farm jobs is credited to the nonfarm population. These
nonfarm earnings are particularly important in the case of very lowincome farmers. In the third place the intangible satisfactions that
attach to farming as a way of life cannot be measured at all. Finally
these per capita figures are, after all, mathematical averages and
are therefore not at all typical. They are pulled down by the extremely low incomes of subsistence farmers in certain extensive
problem areas * like the Southern Appalachian Coal Plateaus, the
Ozarks, and the cut-over regions around the Great Lakes and the
1
Carter Goodrich and others, Migration and Economic Opportunity, University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia: 1936.

AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

479

Gulf of Mexico, and by the inclusion in the farm population of
many rural families whose incomes came largely from nonfarm
sources.
But after making all of these allowances it is still true that farmers had good grounds for believing that they were not getting their
fair share of the national income.
FORCES TENDING TO DEPRESS FARM INCOMES
Our prolific farmers. Perhaps the most powerful and persistent
force operating to keep incomes below nonfarm incomes is the biological robustness of the American farm family. The differential is
narrowing, but, in 1950, the average number of children per farm
family was still 50 percent greater than the average number per
urban family. Unless the market demand for agricultural labor
increases much faster than the demand for labor generally, this
population growth differential will, in and of itself, tend to keep
farm incomes below nonfarm incomes.
Our national land policy. Historically our national land policy
has left us with a relative oversupply of farmers and with extensive
areas in cultivation which should never have been put to the plow.
When the thirteen states entered the Federal Union they surrendered their vast and conflicting claims to the western lands.
The federal government sold these lands in part for revenue, but
primarily to encourage the rapid settlement of the country. After
1862 federal lands were given away in small units to householders
with little attention to the relation of the size to the character of
the soils and the climatic conditions. Decade after decade population poured into the West from Europe and from the older and
more settled parts of the country. Life on the frontier was hare1
and dangerous. Much of the land was put under cultivation while
it was still submarginal from the strictly economic point of view
The settlers, however, gladly accepted the resulting sacrifices, confident that, over the years, the rise in land values would provide
delayed compensation for present privations. Meantime, competition prevented them from getting the going rates of return on their
labor and the future land value increments as well.
The era of cheap land is over, but the price mechanism is still
burdened with the task of bringing about a sufficient shift of man
power from farm to nonfarm activities to equalize the marginal
productivity of labor as between these two great sectors of the
economy. The task is all the more difficult because farm families
are largest in the poor and relatively isolated farming areas. The

480

AGRICULTURE

lower the fertility of the soils, the higher appears to be the fertility
of the families dependent on these soils. The relatively low incomes
of American farmers taken as a whole appear to be due primarily
to the concentration of poverty in these poor land areas with their
small farms and their large families.
The heritage of World War I. During World War I the United
States had to step in and fill part of the food and fodder gap created
by the sharp contraction of agriculture in Europe as the resources
of that continent went to war. It is estimated that by the end of
the war some 30 million additional acres were under cultivation in
this country alone. (Comparable expansions occurred in Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, and in many countries of South America.)
We were able to do this, despite the military drain on our farm
labor supply, through mechanization and the use of power-driven
machines. This substitution of gasoline power for horse (and mule)
power had the further effect of releasing for human needs substantial additional acreage. With the restoration of agricultural
production in Europe after the war it was inevitable that American
agriculture would be confronted with a very difficult adjustment
problem.
The revolution in agriculture. Rapid progress in the application
of the physical, chemical, and biological sciences to agriculture
has greatly increased in recent years crop yields per acre and reduced the man power needed to harvest the acres. Science has
postponed the effects of the law of diminishing returns. Corn yields
in the United States, for example, rose from 20.5 bushels per acre
in 1930 to 42.8 in 1948. The corresponding figures for cotton were
157 and 311 (pounds); for potatoes, 109& and 215& (bushels). Between 1910 and 1950 farm output per man hour more than doubled.
One hundred years ago, the average farm worker produced food
and fiber for 4/2 people; by 1900 he was producing enough to take
care of 14 persons; today he supplies 22 people. These developments have put a further heavy load on the price mechanism as a
means of inducing the needed voluntary shifts of population from
farm to nonfarm occupations.
The protective tariff. A protective tariff, as we have seen, hurts
the export industries of a country. Throughout most of our history
American agriculture was an export industry. Consequently, our
high tariffs on manufactured and semi-manufactured goods hurt
the farmer in two ways. First, they reduced the ability of foreigners to earn dollars and hence cut down the foreign demand for our
great export crops, thus reducing the prices at which these crops

AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

481

could be sold. Second, they increased the prices of many of the
things the fanner bought. In brief, the tariff worsened the terms
of trade between the farm and the nonfarm sectors of the economy.
Population immobility. None of the foregoing forces operating
singly or in combination could keep farm incomes chronically below nonfarm incomes if workers were completely mobile. But as
Adam Smith pointed out in his discussion of the large differences
in wages prevailing in the different parts of the United Kingdom
of his day, "man is of all sorts of luggage the most difficult to be
transported." 2 This being so, it is not surprising that farmers' incomes have tended to be lower than those of nonfarmers.
Urban subsidization. Man doubtless is the most difficult of all
sorts of luggage to be transported. Nonetheless he is not completely
immobile and nowhere is this truer than in the United States. The
steady decline in the proportion of the population classified as rural
shows that a portion of the farm youth of each generation has been
willing to seek urban employment. During the single decade of
the 1920s more than six millions left our farms for our cities. This
exodus undoubtedly prevented the disparity between farm and
nonfarm incomes from being even greater than it was. While the
farm group as a whole benefited, the migration nonetheless involved a sort of concealed subsidization of our cities. In the first
place many of those leaving the farms had ownership claims which
had to be honored by those who remained behind. Some part of
the mortgage debt of American farmers in each generation has
been incurred to settle these claims. The debts themselves are not
productive in the sense that debts incurred to buy power machinery
or to till and fence land are productive. Thus the servicing of these
debts places a transfer burden on the farm population which reduces their share of the national income and increases that of the
urban population.
Rural communities have also invested billions of dollars in the
rearing and education of young people, only to lose them to the
cities when they reach the age at which they produce more than
their keep.
These two forces have contributed historically to the disparity
between urban and farm incomes. They were operative up to and
through the 1920s. Whether they will continue to exercise a depressing effect on farm incomes remains to be seen. The recent
growth of state and federal grants-in-aid, coupled with the shift
from indirect taxes to direct and progressive taxes on personal in2 The Wealth of Nations, Book I, chap. viii. p. 67.

482

AGRICULTURE

comes, may well have reversed the situation. It is quite possible
that, at the present time, the cities are subsidizing the rural areas.
But in our search for an explanation of the forces of revolt that were
building up in the farm population "urban subsidization" deserves
mention.
Farm tenancy.3 In a sense the farm tenant problem represents
a digression. It is only indirectly related to the issue here under
discussion and only to the extent that it can be shown to lead to
the inefficient use of land, and hence to a failure of farm tenants
to contribute as much as they might to total farm income.
The term "tenancy" is used to describe a situation in which one
person owns real estate and another uses it. The tenant contract
defines the relationship. The contract may be written or oral; it
may run for a term of years, a year, or for an indefinite period of
time. In the case of a farm the tenant may pay in cash, or in a
share of the produce, or in cash and a share of specified crops. The
landlord may share in the expenses of operating the farm, or all of
these may rest on the tenant. Finally, the landlord may direct in
detail the operating program for the farm, or all decisions may be
left to the tenant.
Written contracts for these relationships are the exception in
the United States. Most are oral, run from year to year, and call for
payments in the form of a share of the crop or crops. The landlord's share depends in part on local custom and in part on the
amount of his contribution to the operating expenses. There are
close to two million tenant farmers in the United States today, with
only one in five paying a cash rental.
American public opinion has always looked with disfavor on
tenancy. The Homestead laws with their free grants of land were
designed to create a rural population of owners operating familysized farms. This disfavor is not entirely justified. Tenancy can
play a constructive role in an agricultural society. It can be a means
by which men with an aptitude for farming but without capital
gain access to the land; it can be a ladder up which the able and
ambitious can climb to ownership. A good farmer may find it more
profitable to invest in livestock and farm equipment, rather than
tie up his capital in land and be forced to cultivate a smaller acreage than he needs to give full scope to his managerial abilities.
3

This discussion of tenancy is a condensation of a somewhat fuller statement to be
found in John V. Van Sickle's Planning for the South, Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville: 1943, pp. 132-143.

AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

483

A less able operator, on the other hand, may benefit from the supervision which many landlords give to their holdings.
In theory it should be a matter of indifference to a young man
whether he starts out as a tenant or as an owner-operator. If competition were perfect, the owner-operator would have tied up in
the purchase price of the land an amount equal to the capitalization
of the annual rental payment of the tenant. In principle, tenancy
and land ownership stand on the same footing. For this to be true,
however, several conditions have to be satisfied; and it is the fact
that they are not satisfied that makes tenancy in the United States
a social and economic problem.
The objectionable feature of tenancy in the United States is that
it fails to provide the proper work incentives because it does not
guarantee the tenant, as a legal right, the value of any unexhausted
improvements he may have made to the farm during his term of
occupancy. On any farm, however diversified, the work load cannot be spread evenly over the entire year. Slack times should be
used to repair buildings, mend fences, stop up gullies, drain low
lying land, and otherwise increase the long-run productivity of the
land. There is no incentive for a tenant on a one-year oral lease
to use his spare time in this fashion. As far as the law is concerned,
any improvements he makes belong to the landlord. The latter
will be within his legal rights to demand a higher rent at the next
renewal date. The result is that many tenants do not make effective
use of their time throughout the entire year. In some parts of the
country, and particularly in one-crop areas, tenancy appears to
have contributed to a wasteful and demoralizing pattern of human behavior. The tenant farmer in the Cotton South, for example,
works long and hard at planting, harvesting, and weeding times,
and then idles away much of the rest of the year. Children growing up in such an environment come to take this shiftless behavior
pattern for granted.
The trouble with our typical oral tenant contract is that it violates the "responsibility" assumption on which a private enterprise
system depends. The quid pro quo principle of the market is violated. If the tenant undertakes to improve the land, there is no
guarantee that he will be paid for what he does. The landlord is
in a position to get something for nothing. This being so, the tenant
frequently does nothing. Indeed, in the short run, he has no incentive even to maintain the fertility of the land. This is one reason
why tenancy in the United States has proved so hard on the land
and the people.

484

AGRICULTURE
FARMING AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

The implications of the analysis up to this point are that a constructive farm program should aim at (1) making it easier for farm
youth to find nonfarm jobs, (2) increasing the demand for farm
products by lowering tariffs and otherwise expanding the demand
for farm products, and (3) improving the farm tenant contract.
Most economists are in agreement on these points. But many
agricultural economists hold that more is needed as long as business
cycles persist. They point out that farm incomes fluctuate much
more than nonfarm incomes during the up- and downswings of the
cycle and conclude that continuous governmental interventions are
needed to stabilize farm incomes.
The supporting argument runs roughly as follows: The short-run
demand-and-supply schedules for most agricultural products are
relatively inelastic. Changes in money demand have relatively large
effects on agricultural prices and relatively small effects on agricultural outputs and employment. This response is due primarily to
the fact that so large a part of farm costs are fixed. On the typical
family farm the labor is provided by the farmer and the members
of his family. Family living expenses, inflexible property taxes, and
interest charges on borrowed capital are all part of his overhead.
They cannot be reduced by cutting down production. The substitution of power-driven machinery for horsepower has increased his
need for a cash income in good times and bad. The farm does not
grow gasoline. Consequently farm output and employment tend
to remain high in the face of a falling demand for agricultural products. If there is any decline in production it is likely to be due to
reduced expenditures for fertilizer and disease control, rather than
to reduced acres planted and harvested. In manufacturing, on the
other hand, where variable costs loom larger and competition is
less perfect, a fall in demand leads to a relatively sharp decline in
production and employment, and to a relatively small decline in
prices.
This marked difference in the responses of the farm sector and
the manufacturing sector accounts for the exceptional instability of
net farm incomes over the business cycle. In periods of rising prices
and high economic activity farmers as a class share and perhaps
more than share in the general prosperity, despite the permanent
forces operating to keep their incomes below those of the nonfarm
population. In periods of general falling prices and low economic
activity, the short-run supply-and-demana conditions here under

AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

485

consideration reinforce the more permanent forces and drive the
net incomes of farmers to intolerably low levels. Moreover many of
those thrown out of employment in the cities return to the land
where at least they can dig a subsistence out of the soil. Thus a
reduced money income has to be divided among more people.
Theoretically farmers could and should set aside a portion of
their incomes in fat years to take care of the lean years. But this
is very hard to do. Rather there is a very human tendency for
farmers to use the earnings of the good years to provide for themselves and their families the comforts and conveniences which have
meantime become commonplaces in urban homes. Furthermore the
rapid improvements in farming equipment increase the optimum
size of the farm unit and hence lead able farmers to use their high
incomes of good years (and to borrow) in order to enlarge their
holdings. Then in the ensuing period of depression farmers are
forced to let their farms run down or even to lose them through
foreclosures in the event that they had overborrowed during the
preceding period of prosperity.
This, in short, is the argument for a permanent aid program for
farmers. We shall examine in the next chapter two proposals for
sheltering farmers from the full effects of the business cycle.
SPECIAL COMPLICATIONS
So much for the behavior of farm incomes over minor cycles
of prosperity and depression. The depression that set in in 1929
was no minor recession. We shall have more to say regarding it in
our discussion of the foreign economic policies of the United States
during the 1920s. Here we wish to point out why the farm sector
of the American economy was more than usually vulnerable when
The Great Depression hit in the fall of 1929.
Two forces appear to have been at work: overindebtedness and
the decline in agricultural exports as a result of our tariff and immigration policies of the 1920s.
Farm debt. We have already indicated why farm indebtedness
tends to increase during the upswing of a typical cycle. Here we
want to point out how the behavior of farm land prices in a period
of rising general prices encourages overborrowing.
Farm land prices are based on the capitalization of existing rents,
plus anticipated future increases in rents. In periods of rising agricultural prices money rents rise. If the rise continues for some
years, the market establishes values that are out of line with current rents. In an earlier chapter this relationship was expressed by

486

AGRICULTURE

the formula V = (a/r) + (i/r2). Even a slowing down in the rise
of agricultural prices, and hence of rents, can prove embarrassing.
A price recession produces a collapse in land values (the i/r2 part
of the formula becomes negative).
Between 1909 and 1920 there was a fairly steady rise in agricultural prices which reflected itself in rising farm land values. Between 1912 and 1920 farm land values rose by 75 percent. The
rapid recovery of agriculture in Europe at the end of World War I
led to a world-wide fall in agricultural prices. Farm land values in
the United States were particularly hard hit. By 1930 farm land
values were one-third less than they had been ten years before.
Farmers on good land who had resisted the temptation to borrow
and buy land at inflated prices, or who had repaid their loans during the period of rising agricultural prices, managed to make a fair
living during the 1920s. But it was precisely in good farm land
areas that speculation in farm lands was most intense. As a consequence farmers as a group failed to share in the general prosperity
of that decade. The gap between farm and nonfarm incomes
widened. This debt situation had not been cleared up when The
Great Depression hit the farm sector.
The situation was further complicated when thousands of country
banks closed as the result of defaults on their farm loans.
Our tariff and immigration policies. We have already indicated

why the interests of the American farmer were hurt by our traditional protectionist tariff policy. Here we wish to emphasize two
things: First, protectionism does much more harm after a country
has reached industrial maturity and becomes a creditor country
than it does when the country is in the infant-industry stage of its
development and is borrowing heavily abroad.4 Second, the adverse
effects of tariffs are mitigated if governments allow peoples to move
freely and settle where they will. Up until 1920 our government
actively encouraged immigration.5 There are sound psychological
and sociological reasons why our open-door immigration policy
could not be continued indefinitely. Unfortunately the drastic reversal of our immigration policy and the sharp increases in our
tariffs during the very decade in which we became the world's
greatest industrial power and the foremost creditor nation made
the recovery of the European nations from the effects of the first
World War very difficult and led them to impose drastic restric4

The reasons why this is so are developed in Chapter 38.
Our restrictions on the entry of Chinese and Japanese represent exceptions to this
statement.
5

AMERICAN FARM PROBLEM

487

tions on American exports. The American farmer was one of the
chief sufferers. Thus during the three years 1921-1923 inclusive
our exports of crude foodstuffs represented 11.3 percent of total
exports, whereas they fell to 5.1 percent of the reduced exports of
the three-year period 1929-1931.6 The dollar value of our exports
of crude foodstuffs in the later period were down by almost 60
percent.
Inevitably this abrupt drop in foreign demand, when coupled
with the decreased domestic demand resulting from massive urban
unemployment, provoked a disastrous fall in the prices of almost
all agricultural products. In 1932 the prices of wheat and a number of other basic products were the lowest in 300 years. In some
local markets corn was down to 15 cents, cotton and wool to 5 cents,
hogs and sugar to 3 cents, and beef to 2/2 cents. The net income of
farm operators averaged 80 cents per day. Farm lands were being
rapidly depleted by erosion and the loss of organic matter. Mortgage debt equaled one-fourth the value of all farm real estate.7
American agriculture was close to bankruptcy. Most of the individual state governments had exhausted their credit and were unable
to do anything more to hold back the rising tides of distress. It was
politically necessary and economically desirable that the Federal
Government should lend a hand. What was done is described and
appraised in the next chapter. That the appraisal is, on the whole,
unfavorable does not imply that the Federal Government should
have done nothing.

Questions:
1. Explain why per capita income figures expressed in dollars tend to
undervalue real farm incomes more than they do the real incomes
of nonfarmers.
2. Identify the historical forces that have tended to keep real farm incomes lower than nonfarm incomes.
3. Explain the meaning of the statement: "The American tariff worsened
the terms of trade between the farm and the nonfarm sectors of the
economy."
4. Explain the meaning of the statement: "The migration of farm people to cities involves a concealed subsidization of our cities."
6
Calculated from data in U.S. Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the
United States, 1789-1945 (1949).
7
Summarized from 1951 Report of the Secretary of Agriculture, U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.: p. 13.

488

AGRICULTURE

5. "Given pure competition it would be a matter of indifference whether
a young man started out as a farm tenant or a farm owner-operator."
Define pure competition and indicate what further conditions would
have to be satisfied to make the statement true.
6. Explain the respects in which the typical farm tenant contract
violates the "responsibility" requirement of the private enterprise
system.
7. Explain (a) why farm incomes tend to fluctuate more than nonfarm
incomes during the up- and down-swings of the business cycle and
(b) why rising and falling farm incomes exercise a disproportionate
effect on farm land values.

35
Government and the Ftarrner

THIS chapter we shall (1) trace
the evolution of the New Deal in agriculture; (2) appraise the various programs; and (3) suggest modifications designed to make federal interventions consistent with the working requirements of a
market economy.
The measures to be examined fall under the following headings:
1. Improved credit facilities.
2. Output restrictions.
3. Price supports.
4. Soil conservation.
5. Tenancy reform and the promotion of farm ownership.

IMPROVED CREDIT FACILITIES

From the very beginning of our history the American farmer
has complained of the inadequacy and the high cost of capital. His
support of the Greenback and the Free Silver movements of the
last century was due to his belief that a more ample supply of
money would not only support agricultural prices, but would also
enable him to borrow on more favorable terms.
The federal agencies to which he now looks for credit assistance
are the Farm Credit Administration, the Farmers' Home Administration, and the Rural Electric Administration.
The Farm Credit Administration (FCA). The work of the FCA
goes back to the Federal Farm Loan Act of 1916. At the present
time, and as a result of amendments made in the early 20s and 30s,
there are four federal agencies to which farmers can turn for longand short-term credit: the Federal Land Banks, the Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, the Production Credit Corporations, and the
Central Bank for Cooperatives.
489

490

AGRICULTURE

In 1950 these agencies had approximately $2 billions out on loan.
They depend for their funds on their earned surpluses and on their
ability to borrow in the open market. None of their loans are guaranteed either as to principal or as to interest.
The activities of these credit agencies are entirely consistent with
the operating requirements of the private enterprise system. They
provide farmers with types of credit accommodations which ordinary commercial banks are not equipped to provide. Capital has
been made more mobile and hence more available by the process
of pooling risks. Regional differences in interest rates have been
reduced. There is no subsidization involved.
The Farmers' Home Administration (FHA). The purpose of this

agency is to provide credit and outright assistance to poor farmers,
croppers, and farm laborers whose credit standing is such that they
cannot borrow through private commercial banks or through the
agencies of the Farm Credit Administration.
The FHA makes direct loans and insures loans made by private
investors up to 90 percent. It is authorized to make four types of
direct loans: (a) short-term operating loans running from one to
seven years; (b) farm purchase loans amortizable over 40 years; (c)
housing loans amortizable over 33 years; (d) water facility loans in
17 Western states; and (e) since 1949, disaster loans. It it also
authorized to make outright emergency loans to small farmers for
minor repairs "essential to health and safety." Since the beginning
of the program, the ceilings on individual loans have been raised,
the interest rates lowered, and the repayment periods lengthened.1
The Rural Electric Administration (REA). The Rural Electric

Administration, first set up under the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935, was given statutory sanction by the REA Act of
1936 and placed under the Department of Agriculture in 1939. Its
purpose is to bring power and light to poorer agricultural areas not
adequately served by private companies. A 1944 amendment liberalized the terms on which it might advance capital. Five years later
1
From 1935 up to 1946, the federal government had made loans of the FHA type to
about one million farmers. By mid-1950 seven-eighths of these loans, totaling more
than one billion dollars, had been repaid with interest. This would have been an exceedingly creditable performance had the transaction not occurred in an inflationary period
in which it would have been hard for any large number of borrowers to fall down on
their obligations. The dollars the government got back were worth much less than the
dollars it loaned.
In 1950 106,000 farmers received operating loans totaling $96 million; 2,293 secured
home ownership loans of some $15 million. From April 1949 to mid-1950, approximately
26,000 farmers were beneficiaries of disaster loans, and from November 1949 to the
same date, 4,157 families received $18 million in building loans.

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

491

the Administration was authorized to make loans for rural telephone
lines.
The RE A makes 100 percent loans (i.e., it puts up all the capital)
to electric power and light and telephone associations which can
qualify. Preference is given to public bodies, cooperatives, and
nonprofit or limited dividend companies. In addition, the Administration provides free of charge expensive legal, engineering,
and other technical services. In 1944 the interest rate was lowered
to a flat 2 percent, and the repayment period was extended from
25 to 35 years.
The four billion dollars loaned to date do not figure as part of
the national debt, despite the fact that the loans are guaranteed as
to principal and interest by the federal government. This large
sum would not have been forthcoming at 2 percent, were it not for
the fact that every taxpayer in the country stands obligated to help
redeem the loans in the event of defaults. The subsidy element in
the program is thus substantial.2
The bringing of electric light, power, and telephone service to
areas of scattered settlement is relatively costly. Private utility
companies have never penetrated such areas. The special costs involved require rates so high as to preclude any general use of the
services. Only through outright or disguised subsidies can the people in such areas be generally served. Under private enterprise the
subsidy would have to be paid by consumers in more densely
settled areas in the form of higher rates. It is only fair to add,
however, that the private companies also failed to enter many prosperous farming regions either for lack of vision or lack of capital.
The REA program is based on the thesis that these services
should not be limited by ability to pay. They are held to belong
in the same category as good roads, postal service, and education.
If private utilities cannot provide them, government should—and
not the state governments, but the federal government.
Since the service charges do not cover all costs, as private companies would have to figure costs, the demand naturally exceeds the
supply. Hence it is necessary to allocate funds according to a
political formula. At the present time one-half of the amount an2

At the end of 1950 some 3,800,000 farms and rural dwellings had been affected by
the program, and at that time approximately 23,000 additional families were being serviced each month. Farmers of the Old South have been the greatest beneficiaries of
this program. In 1935, for example, less than 5 percent of the farms of the South had
electricity, whereas almost 50 percent of those in the Pacific Coast states were electrified.
Sixteen years later close to 80 percent of Southern farms had been supplied with electricity, while in the Pacific Coast states coverage was almost complete.

492

AGRICULTURE

nually appropriated by the Congress is allocated to the states on
the basis of the proportion each state's unelectrified farms bear to
the total number of farms without central station electric service.
The other half is distributed at the discretion of the Rural Electric
Administration, subject to the proviso that not more than 10 percent
may be loaned in any one state.
General observations. It is obvious that the federal farm credit
program has modified the terms and the direction of flow of capital.
It has forced considerable amounts into a sector of the economy
where the marginal productivity of land and labor are both low.
The justification is supposed to be social. If, however, these measures serve to keep people in submarginal areas, the long-run social
costs may prove heavy.
OUTPUT RESTRICTIONS

The program for raising farm commodity prices represents an
even more complete rejection of the market mechanism than do the
credit measures described in the preceding section.
The beginnings are to be found in the pre-New Deal Agricultural
Marketing Act of 1929. This Act created a Federal Farm Board
with a revolving fund of $500 million to stimulate the development
of national cooperatives for the "orderly marketing" of farm products. Most of this money was used to provide the capital for two
stabilization corporations for wheat and cotton. No provision was
made for controlling production. As a result of a sequence of good
harvests and the general recession the fund was soon exhausted and
the government found itself in the possession of large holdings
whose very existence constituted an unstabilizing influence. Some
$400 million were lost in these two operations.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933. The lesson of the
Farm Board experience was that a purchase program without a
production control program was unworkable. The original AAA
Act of 1933 combined price supports and controls. Under it the
government ordered the destruction of a portion of certain growing
crops, the slaughter of "the little pigs," and acreage restrictions on
the next year's planting of so-called basic commodities. Originally seven commodities were so classified: wheat, cotton, corn,
hogs, tobacco, milk, and milk products. The resulting shift of
acreage to other crops depressed the prices of these crops and
soon forced an extension of acreage restrictions to nine additional
commodities.
Parity. The objective of the program was to give farmers

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

493

"parity" prices for their principal crops. Parity was defined as
the price which would equal in purchasing power that which the
commodity had commanded in the base period which, in general,
was the five years 1909-1914. Parity was to be determined by a
comparison of the percentage change (a) in the current price of
each basic commodity, and (b) in the current prices of the principal items bought by farmers, both changes measured against
the corresponding prices of the base period. Thus if corn is currently selling at 20 percent more than its 1909-14 average price,
while the prices of the things the farmer currently buys are 50
percent higher, corn will be selling at 80 percent of parity.
To induce compliance the government paid cooperating farmers
benefits based on the acreage withdrawn from production and imposed fines on noncompliers. The necessary funds were raised by a
processing tax on the first handlers of the protected crops. Payments were limited to the yield of the tax. During this early period
the support level remained low, around 50 percent of parity. The
program did little more than set a floor under a few major agricultural prices.
The Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act. In January,

1936, the Supreme Court held the processing tax unconstitutional
as an illegal use of the taxing power to regulate an activity expressly
reserved to the states. To get around this constitutional hazard the
Congress promptly passed the Soil Conservation and Domestic
Allotment Act. Acreage restrictions were declared to be for the
purpose of soil conservation, and benefit payments were to be defrayed from general revenues. The benefit payments were to encourage the substitution of "soil building" for "soil depleting" crops
and for the adoption of conservation practices. By a fortunate
coincidence the list of soil-depleting crops proved to be very much
the same as the list of basic commodities of the outlawed AAA.
Effects of acreage restrictions. Actually the acreage restrictions
never succeeded in lifting agricultural prices to parity, because they
had little effect on output. Farmers dropped from cultivation their
most unproductive fields and worked more intensively their permitted acreage. They also became more receptive to the technical
advice coming from the State Colleges of Agriculture, the Experiment Stations, and the County Agricultural Agents, and more willing to apply fertilizer and to make use of the new hybrid seeds that
were coming on the market. Furthermore the improved conservation measures which the Conservation Service was promoting soon
reflected themselves in increased yields. The corn yield, for ex-

494

AGRICULTURE

ample, as was pointed out earlier, rose from 24 bushels in 1935 to
43 bushels in 1943.
PRICE SUPPORTS

Because of the relative failure of the production control program
the Administration was obliged to rely primarily on its spending
power to provide farmers with the parity prices they felt they
deserved. The price support program is handled through the Commodity Credit Corporation. At present the Corporation is capitalized at $100 million and has authority to borrow up to $6,750
million. Its bonds are guaranteed as to principal and interest by
the federal government. Its major responsibility is to carry out the
government's agricultural price support program. This is done primarily through nonrecourse loans and secondarily through marketing agreements and diversion operations.
Nonrecourse loans. A farmer who is dissatisfied with the
prevailing market price may borrow from the Corporation at a
price set by the government. If the market price fails to rise above
the loan level, he may redeem his note by delivering title to the
crop to the Corporation. If, on the other hand, the price rises above
the loan level he may pay off his note, redeem his crop, and pocket
the difference. It is a "heads-I-win, tails-you-lose" proposition with
the taxpayers taking all the losses. The program is applicable to
storable crops only. If granted on a large enough scale, nonrecourse
loans can set a price floor under such crops at any desired level.
The program was started in a small way with corn and cotton
and with the loan prices well below the official parity figures. Discretion as to the crops to be supported and the level of support was
left with the Secretary of Agriculture. The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 for the first time made it mandatory on the Secretary to support corn, cotton, and wheat at not less than 52 and not
more than 75 percent of parity. The Secretary was further authorized, at his discretion, and within the limits of the funds at his
disposal, to support other storable crops.
The pressure to include more commodities and to fix the support
level closer to the 75 percent ceiling was naturally tremendous. In
January, 1941, the mandatory minimum support price was raised
to 85 percent of parity and tobacco and rice were added to the list.
In July of that same year the Secretary was required by the Steagall
Amendment to lift the loan level to 85 percent of parity on any
other commodity for which he might request an increase in production as part of the impending military preparedness program.

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

495

Continuance of support at this level was guaranteed by the Congress for two years after the end of the war. In October, 1942, the
support level was raised to 90 percent of parity for corn, wheat, and
tobacco, to 92M percent for cotton, and to not less than 90 percent
for the commodities covered by the Steagall Amendment, with the
same guarantee for the first two postwar years.
Flexible versus inflexible price supports. The Agricultural Act
of 1948 provided that with the 1950 crop year the support price
would range from 60 percent of parity, when a crop promised to
exceed the country's "normal consumption requirements," to 90
percent of parity when it fell to 70 percent of normal requirements.
The following year the Congress postponed the application of the
flexibility principle for one year, raised the minimum from 60 to 75
percent of parity for basic commodities (with the exception of
tobacco, for which 90 percent of parity was made mandatory), set
an 80 percent minimum for any 1951 crop for which marketing
quotas or acreage allotments were in effect, directed the Secretary
to provide support at various levels for another group of politically
potent crops, and authorized him at his discretion to support still
others at not more than 90 percent of parity. Even this maximum
could be exceeded if the Secretary were convinced, after proper
hearing, that a higher support level was necessary to alleviate shortages involving national welfare or national security.
In addition to providing for a flexible level of supports the 1948
Agricultural Act also provided for a more realistic method of calculating parity for each commodity, based on its average price over
the last 10-year period. Each year the year most remote in time
was to be dropped and the most recent crop year added. The Act
of the following year, while postponing flexible price supports, retained the modernized formula for calculating parity. The new
formula was to be mandatory for nonbasic commodities and optional
for basic commodities, depending on which formula yielded more
favorable results. The new formula was to be mandatory for all
crops beginning the first of January, 1954. But in 1952, on the eve
of the Presidential election, the Congress voted to extend the dual
method of computing parity through December 31, 1955, which
was tantamount to continuing the old formula.3
Marketing agreements and orders. Since 1933 the Secretary of
3
The program is very expensive. Almost $2.7 billion were required to support the
prices of 1949 crops. Over one billion dollars was involved in 1950 crop supports. Part
of these funds are subsequently recovered as surpluses are disposed of, but a total of
$346 million was lost on price supports in fiscal 1950.

496

AGRICULTURE

Agriculture has been authorized to order processors and handlers of
a few agricultural products (after public hearings and the approval
of two-thirds of the producers concerned) to enter into price-raising
and price-fixing agreements that would otherwise be illegal under
the anti-trust laws. In 1950 these restrictive practices were in effect
for milk, fruit, nuts, hops, and all perishables for which nonrecourse
storage loans were not available. The milk orders set minimum
prices which handlers must pay. For the others, control is through
limits set on the qualities and quantities that may be shipped, rates
of shipment, establishment of reserve pools, prohibition of "unfair"
trade practices, price posting, and similar devices.
Diversion operations. As long as the government sets prices
above those which would clear the market, surpluses necessarily
accumulate. These must be disposed of or allowed to go to waste.
Limited quantities are disposed of through ordinary commercial
channels when prices occasionally rise more than 5 percent above
the current support price levels, plus carrying charges. Certain
government agencies are authorized to buy government-held stocks
for use abroad or in international barter arrangements for commodities not produced in the United States. Another method of
disposal is through outright gifts to the Bureau of Indian Affairs,
public and private welfare organizations, and to public schools in
states which support school lunch programs. The government is
also authorized to make payments to commercial exporters to permit them to sell competitively in foreign markets stored commodities which have been priced out of international markets by the
domestic support program.
An appraisal of the price support program. The parity objective

of the program described above is sound. It is the method which
is faulty. A constructive aid program, whether it be for a socialist
society or a capitalist society, should seek to equalize the marginal
productivity of labor and capital in the various sectors of the economy by promoting shifts of resources out of low-paying occupations. Such a program would seek to reduce the man power
presently attached to the agricultural sector, with the reduction
concentrated in the areas where the character of the soils or the
nature of the climate is such that the traditional family farm cannot
yield the going rate of return to labor and capital, regardless of the
level of agricultural prices.
The attempt to solve the farmer's income problem through price
supports obstructs this type of adjustment.
(1) High and rigid price supports provide a distorted pattern of

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

497

agricultural prices which results in outputs that do not accord with
current consumer demand. The support levels, based as they are
on cost/price relationships of a by-gone day, are always too high
or too low. If they are too low, they are meaningless. If they are
too high, they provoke surpluses which have to be disposed of at
home or abroad. Disposed of at home, they tend to defeat the
price support program. If sold abroad, they are regarded as dumping and lead to retaliation. As will appear later, the whole program
is inconsistent with our foreign economic policy. Regardless of the
methods of disposal, artificial price supports involve heavy losses
which have to be paid out of general taxes. Many of those who pay
the taxes are less well off than many of the farmers who receive
the benefits.
(2) High price supports must be accompanied by output restrictions if the program is not to cost a lot of money. Output restrictions have to be allocated to the states and, within the states, to
the counties and finally to the individual farms. A political decision is involved which results in an allocation inferior to that
imposed by the free play of market prices. Free prices tend to
drive unproductive land out of use and to allocate production to
the more fertile lands and the more efficient farmers. A political
allocation necessarily perpetuates a past production pattern. Each
farm gets an allotment based on the situation prevailing during an
earlier period. The processes which tend to get land into its highest
and best uses are stopped. The past is protected against the future;
the inefficient is protected against the efficient. This is not the way
to produce the economic surplus which a country needs if it is to
solve the problem of poverty.
(3) Another objection to the price support method of helping the
farmer is that it tends to raise money rents and thus gets incorporated into the land in the form of higher land values. The government's artificially cheap credit policy has had the same effect.
Just as price supports increase the a, or net rent, in the formula
V = a/f, so cheap credit reduces the r, or net interest rate, in the
formula. Those owning farms at the inauguration of these programs
have been the main beneficiaries. Subsequent buyers derive little
benefit. What they gain in higher commodity prices and lower interest rates, they lose in the higher prices they have to pay for land.
While they gain little, they would, of course, lose much if the program were discontinued. With every passing year the program
creates more and more vested interests which would be seriously

498

AGRICULTURE

hurt if a new and more constructive program were substituted for
the existing one.
(4) This tendency of existing farm aids to get translated into
higher land values requires that the aids be periodically increased.
Otherwise they lose their effectiveness. This is one reason why the
farmers' representatives in Congress find themselves forced to push
for higher and higher support prices and more and more generous
credit terms for their constituents. They are caught in the same
dilemma that leads spokesmen for organized labor to demand periodic increases in the minimum wage and in the Walsh-Healey wage
determinations, and protectionists in Congress to demand higher
tariff barriers around the home market.
A constructive aid program for a growing and market-oriented
economy must be so planned that the aid will not get capitalized
into higher land values. American farmers needed help, but the
program reviewed in this section has blocked the processes of adjustment and forced farmers to accept a degree of regimentation
that runs counter to their own traditions and to the requirements of
a private enterprise economy.
CONSERVATION
The federal soil conservation program represents the most constructive part of the present farm aid program. It is aimed at protecting the nation's topsoil from erosion and leaching.
The soil profile. Soil experts speak of the soil profile. This is a
cross section from the soil downward to the underlying rock formation. It consists of three "horizons." The "A," or upper, horizon
is a thin film of earth, or topsoil, varying from 4 to 20 inches in depth,
with 7 inches a good average. Below that lies the "B," or subsoil,
horizon varying in depth from 10 to 40 inches. The "C" horizon,
the last and lowest, consists of the stratum of parent materials. Soil
productivity, at any given time, depends largely upon the condition
of the "A" horizon. It takes nature thousands of years to form an
inch of this precious topsoil; man can destroy it in a single generation. While plant nutrients can be returned by artificial fertilization and by plowing under crops, it is very expensive to replace
the physical body of the soil. A cubic yard of earth weighs more
than a ton. Exposed to wind and rain, tons of topsoil can be carried
away in a single day.
Water erosion has been particularly serious in the Southeast
where climate and terrain combine to make traditional methods
of cultivation hard on soils. In Mississippi, for example, a Southern

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

499

Forest Experiment Station study shows that 6 inches of topsoil will
be carried off of a 10 percent slope in 10 years, if planted to cotton
with the rows running up and down the slope; planted to Bermuda
grass it would take 10,000 years to do the same damage.
Leaching constitutes another threat to soils. The rains soaking
through the upper horizons dissolve and carry away through underground channels the soluble mineral and organic matter essential
to plant growth. Again the South is particularly exposed to this
hazard because of its long, mild winters. The snow and ice which
lock up the soils of the lands farther north are unknown here. As
long as the topsoil is intact, the loss can be made good, in part, at
least, and at a heavy cost, by the application of commercial fertilizers. Unfortunately these same leaching rains, when they fall on
unprotected hillsides, carry off in muddy torrents the precious topsoil itself. In the process navigable streams are destroyed and
fertile bottom lands are flooded, and, in time,4 left buried under
sterile sands and silt.
In the High Plains of the West, between the 100th meridian and
the foothills of the Rockies, wind erosion plays the destructive role
which water erosion plays in areas of more abundant rainfall. The
plow that broke the western plains to wheat exposed millions of
acres of natural grassland to this menace.
Soil destruction violates the principle of responsibility. Farm
practices which needlessly cause erosion violate the principle of
responsibility. Unaided, private enterprise cannot stop the process, because the control mechanism at its disposal is inadequate
to the task. The price mechanism can neither measure the indirect
costs, the damages imposed on neighboring lands, the destruction
of navigable streams, the shortened economic life of dams and
power plants, nor impose compensation on the responsible parties.
If it could, soil erosion would not be a social problem. The offenders would soon be forced into bankruptcy and eliminated.
Since it cannot, the State must intervene.
The negative approach. Two very different remedies are possible. One is negative, the other is positive. Under the negative
approach farmers are told not what they must do, not how they
must cultivate their lands, but what they must not do. This approach calls for careful land surveys, land inventorying, land classification based on soil, topography, and climatic conditions, and the
outlawing in the various land-use districts of practices that are un4

The time period may be very long. To this day the delta lands of the Nile are annually enriched by silting. But what they gain other lands lose.

500

AGRICULTURE

necessarily hard on soil. This negative approach involves rural
land zoning comparable to the urban zoning now in general use in
many of our larger cities. This procedure is entirely consistent
with the operating principles of a market economy and involves no improper infringement on legitimate private rights in
land. It is also economical on the public purse, since no compensation is involved. It is, however, slow, since zoning is a state function and, in a democratic society, it can be invoked only in those
areas where local public opinion has come to understand and approve.
The positive approach. Under the positive approach the government tells the farmer what practices he should follow. The state
governments can do this under the police power; the federal government cannot. Undertaken by the states, this approach could be
economical, but it would be as slow as the negative approach, since
it too would involve the preliminary development of the necessary
local public support in each of the 48 states.
Under the New Deal the positive approach was adopted, and,
with a view to getting around the Constitutional limitations on the
federal power to intervene in matters reserved to the states, and
to making the program acceptable to farmers, the decision was
made to pay farmers to adopt soil-conserving practices or to continue the practices where they were already in use. Compliance
payments were also defended as a means of providing farmers with
parity incomes.
Responsibility for the federal conservation program is divided
between the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) and the Production
and Marketing Administration (PMA).
The SCS is primarily a planning agency. It assists the local
farmers to develop detailed land improvement programs based on
careful land inventory and land classification maps. These maps
show the highest and best use of every type of land found within
the district in which the work is carried on. The Service assists in
the map work and recommends the types of soil and water conservation practices best suited to each piece of land. More than 50
practices have been developed by the Service.
The work of the SCS depends heavily on local initiatives. The
fanners in each state must secure the passage of a state conservation
law, organize local soil conservation districts, and request the assistance of the federal service. By the end of 1950 every state had
passed the necessary legislation and almost 5 million farms in over
2,300 districts were eligible for assistance under the program. Es-

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

501

sentially the SCS mobilizes the best available technical competence
and places it at the disposal of farmers wherever they have shown
sufficient interest to organize themselves and assume responsibility
for the carrying out of a conservation plan.
It is doubtful whether local farmers would cooperate as fully as
they have with the SCS were it not for the fact that the Federal
Government pays part of the costs of approved conservation practices. These payments are made by the Production and Marketing
Administration. Most of these payments are made to farmers within
the state conservation districts, but the Administration is also authorized to make payments to individual farmers whose lands are
not within any district. SCS, however, must approve all the practices for which compliance payments are made. In 1951 over a
quarter of a billion dollars was appropriated for this work. From
its inception to the end of 1951, $2.6 billion of federal funds had
been spent on this program.
Appraisal. The federal conservation program has been valuable.
The public has been made aware of the damage being done to our
soils. Compliance payments have speeded up the adoption of soilbuilding practices. Our knowledge of effective soil control methods
has been increased. From this point of view, the expenditures may
be likened to those for adult education and for research and the dissemination of knowledge. All these results belong on the credit
side of the ledger.
On the debit side are the costs and the threat to democratic institutions, our federal form of government, and our private and
voluntary enterprise system.
The costs are becoming increasingly disproportionate to the general benefits. It seems probable that the majority of farmers would
continue most of the practices even though the benefit payments
ceased. Yet the list of approved practices grows longer, and the
compliance payments rise as the need for them declines. We are
confronted here with a subtle form of political corruption that is
peculiarly damaging to the moral health of a democratic society.
Men seeking public office use the taxpayers* money to buy the
farmers' votes.
In the process federal officials are determining, in more and more
detail, managerial decisions which should be left to the American
farmer himself. The federal power to spend is eroding the political
independence of the states and the moral integrity of the American
farmer. Much can be said for the program as an emergency meas-

502

AGRICULTUBE

ure, but the emergency has passed. It is time to return the problem
to the states.
TENANCY REFORM AND FARM OWNERSHIP
The need for tenancy reform was discussed in the preceding
chapter. Here too the New Deal intervened. The federal program
for improving tenancy and promoting farm ownership is now concentrated in the Farmers' Home Administration to which reference
has already been made. In connection with its operating loans to
tenants the local representatives of the FHA encourage the substitution of written leases for the usual oral one and recommend the
inclusion of clauses to provide compensation for unexhausted improvements and for the local arbitration of differences between
landlords and tenants regarding the interpretation of their respective responsibilities.
The farm purchase loans of the FHA are, as the name indicates,
designed to enable tenants, croppers, and hired workers to become
owners. The purpose of the purchase loans is to demonstrate that
a poor farmer without access to normal lines of credit can earn
enough, if he will work hard and follow sound farm practices, to
support his family and work himself out of debt.
Appraisal. These programs have been administered on too limited a scale to have had much effect on the general situation. This
is particularly true of the land purchase program. In 1950 only
some $15 million was loaned for this purpose. This is fortunate, for
if the program were carried out on the scale advocated at one time
by some enthusiasts in the Department of Agriculture,5 the resulting rise in land values would have saddled the borrowers with a
fixed interest charge that might have made their situation worse than
that of tenants. On the scale on which these programs have been
operated they may have been useful as practical demonstrations,
but the need for them would appear to have passed with the emergency which called them into existence.
REVISING OUR FEDERAL FARM PROGRAM
Existing federal farm aids are inconsistent with our federal form
of government and with the operating requirements of an effective
market economy. Nor are they in the interest of farmers themselves, particularly in periods of high general activity. The very
5

A former director of the program, writing in the official 1940 Yearbook of Agriculture, advocated a program that was designed to cut tenancy in half over a 25-year period
at a cost of about $7 billion.

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

503

forces which make farmers vulnerable in periods of general depression work in their favor in prosperous times. It is precisely in
such times that farmers need the directives and incentives provided
by free market prices. A controlled agriculture and a powerful
trade union movement have introduced extreme rigidities into the
American economy which will require, in the future, as in the past,
repeated doses of inflation if the economy as a whole is to operate
at a satisfactory level. There is, however, a limit to the amount of
inflation a market economy can absorb.
All that the farmer can reasonably ask is that there should be
stand-by arrangements at hand to be brought into action in the
event of a general recession.
A constructive farm program should be tailored to normal times
and to the requirements of our commercial farmers. Provisions for
emergencies should be dealt with separately, whereas the needs of
subsistence farmers in certain poor land areas call for special measures. Although this submarginal group accounts for about onesixth of all farmers, it accounts for only one-thirtieth of all farm
products sold in commercial markets. Their needs are discussed in
a later chapter.
An agricultural program for normal times. The work of the Farmers' Home Administration should be completely eliminated. The
legitimate credit needs of all those who, in the general interest,
should remain in agriculture are adequately served by private investors, the commercial banks, and the financial agencies of the
Farm Credit Administration. Subsistence farmers should not be encouraged to continue their impossible struggle to wrest a living from
their small submarginal farms by cheap federal credit and federal
subsidies.
The Soil Conservation Service should be continued. Appropriations even more generous than at present could well be made for
its fundamental research and for its work on land inventory and
land classification at the state level. The task of converting the Service's findings into action programs should be returned to the State
Colleges of Agriculture and their Extension Services and the County
Agents. The Production and Marketing Administration, like the
Farmers' Home Administration, has outlived its usefulness.
The contribution which improved tenancy arrangements, rural
zoning, and public land acquisitions can make to soil conservation
would be appropriate matters for the Soil Conservation Service to
investigate. These investigations would undoubtedly reveal the
need for legislation to enforce the principle of responsibility as it

504

AGRICULTURE

applies to property rights in land. The drafting of recommendations
and the formulation of model laws would be useful and appropriate
federal activities. The final responsibility, however, for the enactment of legislation should be left to the states. It should also be left
to the individual states to decide whether the use of locally collected
taxes to pay farmers to adopt specified soil-building practices was
justified.
There appears to be no need for any major modifications in the
activities of the Farm Credit Administration. In times of deep
depression, when the special measures to be discussed later come
into play, the Federal Reserve Banks might be authorized to
buy new issues of the Farm Land Banks and the Intermediate
Credit Banks and to support their outstanding obligations. This
would prevent the breakdown of agricultural credit for limited
and critical periods.
The whole complicated and costly apparatus of acreage allotments, price supports, nonrecourse loans, marketing agreements
and orders, and diversionary operations should be abandoned.
Tfhis negative action would suffice to restore competition within
the agricultural sector of the economy. Needless to say, the federal government should also use its great powers to reimpose
and maintain competition in other sectors of the economy where
monopolistic practices gain a footing more easily.
An agricultural program for depression periods. The extreme
sensitivity of agriculture to booms and depressions may justify
the giving of some form of advance assurance to farmers that
federal help will be forthcoming in times of serious depression.
Farm economists are in general agreement on this point. They
are not in agreement, however, regarding the form the assurance
should take.
One suggestion is that the federal government should continue
to provide minimum price guarantees, expressed as a percentage
of a modernized "parity" formula, such as that used in the 1948
Agricultural Act. The percent of parity would be set so low that
the guarantee would come into effect only in periods of deep
and general depression. In normal times farmers would operate
on the basis of free prices. The guaranteed prices, it is argued,
would give farmers the same protection which moderate unemployment compensation and a low minimum wage law give nonfarm workers.
This solution is compatible with the requirements of a com-

GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMER

505

petitive market economy. Whether or not it is politically realistic
is beyond the competence of an economist to answer.
Another suggestion is that the federal government should
avoid all price supports but agree to make substantial payments
to farmers whenever a general business recession went beyond
some defined degree of severity. The enabling legislation would
define the exact method of determining the critical recession
point and would require the Treasury to start the flow of payments immediately thereafter and to discontinue them with
equal promptitude when recovery had brought the economy back
to the critical point. The payments would not be contingent on
any specific performance by farmers, and since they would be
irregular and contingent, they would not get capitalized into land
values.
This proposal, which has the endorsement of a group of distinguished agricultural economists,6 would, it is claimed, mitigate the severity of business depressions, avoid the need for the
output restrictions which increase the real social costs of depressions, and preserve the flexible agricultural prices which are as
necessary to efficient farming in bad times as they are in good
times. The sponsors declare that they have satisfied themselves
that the plan is workable from the administrative point of view.
This proposal is superior to the previous one from a narrowly
economic point of view. But is it politically practical? Does it
adequately recognize the dangers of government checks going
to millions of individual farmers in a democratic society? Only
actual experience can provide an answer to these questions.7
Questions:
1. "The fact that public and cooperative telephone companies operating
in rural areas are able to secure funds at lower rates than private
telephone companies shows that this is an activity which can be carried on more economically by government than by private enterprise." Discuss critically.
2. What do you think would be the effect on the productivity of the
American economy of a guarantee by the federal government of
parity prices to all industries based on the price relationships of
1909-1914?
6
7

Farm Foundation, Turning the Spotlight on Farm Policy (1952).

For a much simpler method of protecting individuals from the uncertainties of a
changing world, see pp. 522-3.

506

AGRICULTURE

3. Upon what constitutional powers does the federal government rely in
the execution of its acreage restriction and price support programs?
4. Indicate the reasons why acreage restrictions have not been very
successful in reducing agricultural output.
5. "The existing American program would never have been adopted had
the elasticity of demand for farm products been greater than unity."
Indicate with supporting reasons your agreement or disagreement
with this statement.
6. A public price-support program which sets minimum prices above
those which would "clear the market" forces the government to hold
large surpluses. Indicate the ways in which the federal government
has tried (a) to prevent the emergence of surpluses and (b) to get
rid of the surpluses.
7. Many hold that the adoption of free trade by the United States at the
present time is in the national interest. Assuming for the moment that
this is correct, can the American Government adopt free trade and,
at the same time, maintain its present domestic farm program?
8. Explain the reasoning behind the statement in the text that in the
course of time any given level of farm aid tends to lose its effectiveness.
9. "The operating requirements of the private enterprise system justify
public interventions to stop needless soil destruction." Give the reasoning in support of this statement and indicate whether this reasoning necessarily justifies the existing federal soil conservation program.

PART EIGHT

Social Security

36
Social Security
ana Private Enterprise

SECURITY occupies an unstable position in the hierarchy of wants of the individual. Psychologists
tell us that the normal growth of the child depends as much upon
the ability of the family to give him a sense of being loved and
wanted, as on its ability to provide him with food, clothing, and
shelter. As he grows up, the importance of security declines. He
wants excitement, change, adventure. Then in his maturity, when
he has a wife and young people to look out for, when his earning
power has declined or ceased, he again craves security.

THE SECURITY CONCEPT ANALYZED

Security is thus neither a simple nor a stable value. It depends
upon attitudes, expectations, internal resources of an intellectual
and spiritual nature, and a host of other intangibles. Continuity of
income, or knowledge that one's daily bread will be forthcoming, is
only one aspect, and frequently one of the least important aspects,
of the problem of security.1 Yet it is the one with which the term
social security has come to be associated, and with which we shall
be concerned in this and the next chapter.
The term social security has two meanings. It refers to the group
feeling of well being that is supposed to exist when the members of
the group have now, and have reason to believe that they will have
1

Bertrand Russell, Why Men Fight: A Method of Abolishing the International
Duel, The Century Co., New York: 1917. Mr. Russell explained the enthusiasm with
which young men in France, Germany, and England rushed to the colors at the outset of World War I as due to a desire to escape from the drab security which modern industrialism had made possible.

509

510

SOCIAL SECURITY

in the future, some minimum income adequate to meet some undefined level of need. It also refers to the battery of measures
which governments can take to assure that everyone shall have as
a right this minimum income without which he would become
dependent upon others. The main purpose of a social security program in a predominantly private enterprise economy is to introduce
an element of income continuity that will remove the sense of personal insecurity regarded as an undesirable feature of this form
of economic organization.
The principal causes of insecurity. The things that can lead to
dependency and hence to a sense of insecurity are legion. It is
generally recognized, however, that there are seven principal causes
of economic insecurity: old age, permanent and total disability, industrial injuries and accidents, off-the-job injuries and illness, medical expenses, and unemployment. When the breadwinners in a
family are unable to work, all those dependent upon them are affected. On the other hand, the medical expenses connected with
the illnesses, injuries, and disabilities of the nonbreadwinners in a
household may bring the family into need, even though the earned
income of the family is unaffected.
The success of any public program for assuring to each household a level of income adequate to take care of the foregoing situations depends upon the level of income protection aimed at relative
to the productivity of the economy taken as a whole, and upon the
effects of the public measures on the ability and the willingness of
individuals to do as much of the job as possible for themselves.
Insecurity in industrial and agrarian countries. The level of income continuity aimed at depends on what public opinion regards
as the basic needs of the individual. Naturally the level aimed at
will tend to be much higher in wealthy industrial countries than in
poor countries. But what is surprising, at first glance, is the fact
that the proportion of people "in need" tends to be greater in
wealthy industrial countries than in poor agrarian countries.
This is due, in part, to differences in popular conceptions of
need. In part, it is due to the fact that many more individuals in
highly industrialized countries are dependent for their daily bread
on the smooth functioning of the economy and on their ability to
work and to find work than is the case in poor and predominantly
agrarian countries.
In an agrarian country the farm largely takes care of its own.
It provides suitable work opportunities for old and young and food
and shelter for all in sickness and in health. The toddler can feed

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

511

the chickens, collect the eggs, lead the cow to pasture, and tend
the sheep. As he grows to manhood he takes on heavier jobs; as
old age comes on he returns to the tasks of his infancy. On the individual farm the communist principle, "from each according to his
ability, to each according to his need," is workable. The authority
of the head of the household, his intimate knowledge of the needs
and capacities of the members of the family, and the sense of family solidarity suffice to prevent abuses. The system never provides
much, but what it does provide is reasonably assured. When it
breaks down as a result of drought, flood, pests, or some other natural event, there is not enough surplus to support an organized
security program.
In industrial countries in which only a small fraction of the people live on farms, the dependency of people on one another and
upon money incomes is much greater. A serious breakdown anywhere cuts off the incomes of tens of thousands. Accidents, sickness, and old age do the same. Very few have the liquid savings
adequate to tide themselves over any considerable period of interrupted earnings. Within a few days or weeks they are forced to
fall back on relatives, friends, neighbors, private charity, or public
relief.
The complex division of labor and the narrow specialization characteristic of highly industrialized countries thus produces a high
but insecure level of living and, at the same time, a widespread
sense of personal insecurity.
The ultimate basis of security is production. No society can be

secure if the people consume more than they produce. We have
seen that any people can do this for a time by not making good
the annual wear and tear and using up the durable wealth accumulated over the past. Any public guarantee of security which leads
to this result can end only in mass insecurity. Many thoughtful observers believe that some of the Western European social security
programs may be doing just this. Real social security depends ultimately upon the capacty of an economic system to maintain a rate
of capital formation at least as rapid as its rate of population growth
and to produce continuously the things which the beneficiaries of
its social security program consume.
The correct objectives: Adjustment and income continuity. Ob-

viously the load which a social security program must carry will
be minimized if all employable persons are continuously and usefully employed. Employment for employment's sake, however, is
not the answer, if the result is the production of things which no

512

SOCIAL SECURITY

one wants, or which are less wanted than things which might otherwise have been produced. A constructive program for a private
enterprise society should aim at continuity of income—at a level
which does not seriously retard net capital formation—provided in
such a way as to make it easier for individuals to adjust to the
changing requirements of the market. If a social security program
can contribute to "humanizing" the costs of adjustment, and hence
reduce the natural reluctance of people to alter their ways of life,
there is a place for it in a society based on private enterprise.
An analogy from the circus 2 may help make clear the role which
a social security program could play in a responsible and dynamic
capitalistic society. These measures can be the net which management throws under the ring in which the acrobats perform. Occasionally a performer falls, but, after bouncing about on the net a
few times, he will climb back on the trapeze or the tight rope.
Spectators would be few in number if the management insisted
upon heightening the suspense by strewing the ring with boulders
to guarantee the destruction of the hapless acrobat whose sense of
timing and balance slackened for even a split second. Modern
man has no desire to substitute the Roman arena for the modern
circus. But the circus would have small appeal if management insisted upon strapping the performers to their apparatus. Social
security measures, in other words, must not be used to prevent man
from falling. Its function is their rehabilitation and their restoration to the working force of the nation and to assisting them to
provide for their old age. If all risk is removed, free society is dead.
That the search for excessive individual security through government can lead only to the massive insecurity of whole nations is
abundantly proved by the events of the recent past. Social security
is not possible in a rigid and inflexible world. It might be well to
eliminate the word "security" from the vocabulary of government,
and substitute in its place the word "adjustment."
RESPONSIBILITY FOR SECURITY

The traditional view. Until quite recently it was taken for
granted that the responsibility for security in a free society rested
primarily with the individual. The family, near relatives, friends,
and neighbors, and finally organized private charities such as the
2

This analogy, together with much of the argument in this chapter, is to be found
in John V. Van Sickle's Planning for the South: An Inquiry into the Economics of
Regionalism, The Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville: 1943, Ch. VII.

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

513

Red Cross and* the Community Chest (all volunteer sources of
help) were seen as the second line of defense against insecurity.
As we shall see presently, this view no longer commands the respect it once did. Nonetheless a very good case can still be made
for the proposition that the responsibility for security is primarily
personal and that the burden of proof is on any individual who
asks to be relieved of this responsibility.
The responsibility of the individual. Most young people in any
society are able to provide themselves and those dependent upon
them with food, clothing, shelter, education, and medical care
over their lifetimes. If this were not true there would be no possibility of a social security program. If the majority of householders
cannot earn what public opinion regards as essential, then the
amount which would have to be taken from the minority would be
so large as to destroy the incentives on which an enterprise economy depends. When politicians say, as they frequently do at election time, that the majority of the people of the United States
need public help, they are really saying that the American people,
taken as a whole, are entitled to consume more than they produce,
and that it is the duty of the State to make this possible.
Methods of meeting individual responsibility. There are a number of ways in which an individual can meet his responsibility.
First, he must be willing to take a new job or to move if changes
in consumer demand or in methods of production have destroyed
the need for his old job. Second, he must be willing to live within
his income in periods when he has work. Third, he must use the
difference to take care of the periods when his earned income will
not be enough to meet his essential needs and those of his family.
One way of doing this is to build up a savings account. Another
way is to take advantage of the many investment outlets that are
available in an enterprise society in which the corporate form of
organization is well developed. Finally—and this is most important
for persons of moderate means—he can insure himself against all
or part of the risks that threaten to force him into dependency.
The importance of the insurance principle. The insurance principle takes advantage of what Winston Churchill has called "the
magic of averages." There are so many events affecting people
which can be predicted with great accuracy as far as large groups
are concerned. On which particular members of the group the loss
will fall is not predictable. If each member of the group will pay
into a central fund his share of the total expected group loss, there

514

SOCIAL SECURITY

will be enough in the fund to reimburse in their entireties the losses
which fall on particular individuals in the group.
Its role in modern capitalism. Modern capitalism makes great
use of the insurance principle. Home-ownership would be very
risky were it not for the fact that the individual owner can insure
himself, for a small annual charge, against the total or partial loss
of his house by fire, storm, etc., despite the fact that, as far as anyone knows, the house may be totally destroyed the day after the
writing of the insurance policy. In similar fashion business firms
can insure their offices and factories, their machinery and equipment, their inventories, their goods in transit, their bills receivable.
The individual can insure himself against the loss of income and the
heavy medical expenses resulting from accidents, sickness, and old
age; he can protect his dependents from need by taking out a life
insurance policy payable at his death. In brief, the opportunities
for protecting one's self, one's dependents, and one's business against
heavy and unpredictable losses by small and regular payments out
of current income are many and varied. A large number of private
companies have developed to provide this protection.
The secondary line of defense.. Unfortunately many people, and
usually the very ones least able to absorb heavy losses, fail to save
or invest or to take advantage of voluntary insurance facilities.
When misfortune strikes, they have to be helped. In societies in
which the family is the basic social unit, help has always come from
other members of the family or close relatives. Parents help their
children; children help their parents. Uncles, aunts, nephews, grandparents, all step into the breach. The more geographically mobile
a population, the weaker is the family as a social unit and the less
it can be relied upon to help the unfortunate or the improvident
over difficult times. Private charity long played a very important
role in this country, but of recent years this source of help has
declined in importance, partly because of the heavy taxes levied on
the well-to-do and partly because of the shift in social philosophy
to which reference will be made shortly. The weakening of family
responsibility and the decline in the role of private charity have
increasingly brought government into the picture.
Government: the last line of defense. When government undertakes to provide for those who fail to provide for themselves, it has
nothing to give except what it takes from those who have been
able and willing to take care of themselves. This suggests that the
incursion of government into the security field should proceed cautiously and with recognition that if it tries to do too much for

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

515

those it is trying to help it may end by bringing insecurity to all.
The supporting social philosophy. The emphasis upon individual
responsibility rested upon a view of human nature that was at
once cynical and optimistic. It was taken for granted that most
people, or at least a considerable minority, were lazy and improvident; that only the fear of want for themselves and their families
would keep them at work, induce them to limit the size of their
families, and to save for a rainy day. Any systematic and compulsory taking from the industrious, the provident, and the ambitious to "coddle" the shiftless and the improvident would destroy
incentives, lead to an increase in the size and a deterioration in
the quality of the population, and result in social conflict and general poverty. It was also taken for granted, however, and this was
the optimistic ingredient, that man is a sympathetic animal and
that he could be counted upon to provide voluntarily for all cases
of genuine need.
The new view. The old view is now very much in eclipse. The
modern view is that government must assume a major role in the
social security field and that only central governments can satisfactorily do this. The dramatic entrance of our federal government
during the 1930s into the field long reserved to private charity and
local public relief was a consequence of The Great Depression, but
its failure to withdraw with the return of good times appears to
be due to the emergence of a new social philosophy and a new
economics.
The new social philosophy. The new view is that man is reasonably good, provident, and industrious, and that his antisocial behavior grows out of his sense of insecurity. Relieve him of this fear,
and his full energies will be released. The make-work rules, the
strikes and jurisdictional disputes, and the desire of farmers for
price supports are all regarded as expressions of this fear. They
will disappear, or at least be much more easily checked, if ways
can be found of assuring to all, as a matter of right, some modest
level of cash income related to need and not to ability to earn.
The desire for more than this modest minimum, it is held, will
amply suffice to encourage the traditional virtues of thrift and industry and to incite the imaginative and the daring to pioneer new
and better methods of production.
Just as the terms "relief" and "charity" reflected the old social
philosophy, so the term "social security" expresses the new.
The new economics. Recent developments in economic theory
have come to the support of the new theory of human behavior.

516

SOCIAL SECURITY

Adherents of what we have called the orthodox theory of the business cycle hold that a market economy which depends for its money
supply on a fractional reserve banking system is not inherently
self-stabilizing. Rather it exhibits tendencies to cyclical fluctuations in output and employment. Economists of Keynesian persuasion agree with this diagnosis, but, in addition, claim that the
inequalities which the system generates may result in a volume of
undigestible savings which produce chronic unemployment.
The orthodox theory leads to the conclusion that public measures
which assist people to spread their earned claims to money over
their entire lives will stabilize their spending and contribute to
the moderation of business fluctuations. The Keynesian theory accepts this conclusion but goes further and calls for heavy taxes on
the well-to-do and their transfer to the poor through expenditures
which will increase the security, the well being, and the productive
effectiveness of those at lower income levels.
These new views regarding human nature and the way a private
enterprise economy operates provide the theoretical underpinning
for contemporary social security programs. The orthodox business
cycle theory supports the use of the contributory insurance principle as a means of helping people spread their money claims over
time so that they may look forward to income as a right at such
times as they are not in a position to earn income. The Keynesian
theory, stressing the value of equalization per se, favors greater reliance on progressive taxes, and less reliance on insurance contributions collected from the poor, as the appropriate method of financing
a social security program. These two economic theories thus give
us two approaches to the security problem—the insurance approach
and the welfare approach.
THE SOCIAL INSURANCES
For better or worse, modern governments are going to help the
indigent, and the aid program is going to involve some combination
of these two approaches. Either money is going to be taken from
those who are not in need and given to those who are, on the basis
of demonstrated need, or all of the people who are not in need at
any given time are going to be forced to contribute regularly to
insurance funds to provide some minimum income, regardless of
need, to all whose regular incomes are interrupted, or who find
themselves confronted with large and unbudgetable claims (hospital expenses, for example). The first is the welfare or assistance
approach; the second is the compulsory insurance approach. The

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

517

more the insurance approach is used to force people to save during
such times as their earned incomes permit, the less will be the
residual burden of assistance. In this section we propose (a) to
examine the case for the compulsory social insurances; (b) to note
some limitations on the use of the insurance principle; and finally
(c) to discuss the problem of financing the social insurances.
The case for the compulsory insurances. In general legal compulsions run counter to the operating principles and still more to
the philosophy of the private enterprise system. In this system,
with its emphasis on voluntarism, the sentiment of charity is supposed to be sufficient to take care of all cases of genuine need.
Fortunately, however, we do not live in the kind of completely logical world in which the improvident and the unfortunate would
be permitted to die if family, friends, or others did not voluntarily
come to their assistance. The risk is too great that worthy cases
would be overlooked. And the burden of helping is too unevenly
distributed. Hence in almost all societies the group as a whole
assumes some responsibility for those in need. Is it not logical,
then, to say that the provident (or fortunate) majority is entitled
to protect its own interests by forcing the less provident (or less
fortunate) minority to save within the limits of their ability for
the rainy days that are bound to come from time to time? May
we not regard this as a method of enforcing the principle of responsibility? The fact that such forced savings stabilize individual
spending over time and hence serve to improve the performance
of the economy strengthens the case for trying to incorporate the
insurance principle into a social security program. If, in addition,
the increased continuity of income can be provided in such fashion as to make less painful the frequent small adjustments that
individuals must make in a dynamic and expanding economy, and
hence reduce the popular resistance to change, then a contributory
social insurance program has a still stronger claim to be regarded
as consistent with the operating requirements of an enterprise
economy.
The limitations of the compulsory insurances. Some of the results of insecurity cannot be reached at all through the compulsory
insurances. Those already too old to work, those already permanently disabled, the congenitally handicapped cannot be expected to make payments into a contributory insurance program.
Other results of insecurity cannot be safely covered in full because
the insurances are not entirely neutral in their effects, even where
the beneficiaries pay all of the costs. Fire insurance companies

518

SOCIAL SECURITY

have learned that full protection against fire losses is an invitation
to arson. Life insurance experiments with permanent invalidity
insurance have shown that "the availability . . . of a regular and
assured income tends to create a powerful psychological barrier
to the claimant's will to recover or be rehabilitated." Similarly,
immediate and full protection against loss of earnings due to unemployment would make idleness attractive, invite strikes for better
wages and working conditions, and necessitate compulsory labor
legislation. Reimbursement of all medical costs would result in
frivolous demands for medical services and medical supplies.
In brief, the probability of abuses may make it socially inexpedient to use the insurance approach to provide full reimbursement
of losses in some cases where this technique would otherwise be
applicable.
A third limitation arises out of the fact that, even where losses
of income are technically insurable, the annual deductions would
be so heavy as to force many otherwise self-supporting persons into
the indigency group. Such persons can pay only part of the full
costs of protection via the insurance route.
Nonetheless a compulsory contributory program can reach more
people than can a private program. A private program must pay
its own way. It can cover only those who are able and willing
to pay the full actuarial costs of the risks against which they seek
protection. A public program is not so limited. It can make the
insured group as a whole pay the full costs but distribute the burden with some reference to ability to pay. By thus reducing the
burden on persons of small incomes it is in a position to force more
people into the program than would otherwise be politically possible. Or it can charge the beneficiaries part of the costs and
spread the balance over the general public through a tax paid by
citizens generally or through a tax on business firms. (The assumption here is that the firms will pass the tax on to consumers in
the form of higher prices, in which case it becomes an indirect tax,
or pass it back to the workers in the form of lower wages, in which
case the workers will, in fact, be paying a higher insurance premium
than they realize.)
The reserve problem. There is a large literature dealing with the
problem of financing a compulsory insurance program. Should the
level of the annual charges be determined as they must be determined by private insurance companies? When a private insurance
company makes a contract to pay an individual a specified monthly
sum beginning at a later date and running to death (i.e., an an-

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

519

nuity), it charges a flat monthly premium. The premium is based
on the annuitant's age, the probability of his surviving to the beginning of the annuity period, the probable number of years from
that date to his death, and the interest the company expects to earn
by investing the premiums. These are expected to build up with
the aid of compound interest a sum sufficient to pay the covenanted
annuity, plus administrative costs and a profit for the company.
If the majority of the policy holders are young at the inception
of the program, annual contributions will greatly exceed annuity
payments for a number of years. The company will accumulate
large reserves which it will invest with the dual purpose of protecting the claims of the policy holders and earning the rate of interest
used in figuring the relationship between premiums and annuities.
The same accumulation occurs in connection with life insurance
policies.
The accumulation problem is not involved in the case of fire,
theft, accident, and most other types of private insurance programs. Past experience and "the miracle of averages" permit of a
fairly accurate estimate of the annual losses. Hence the current
premiums need only cover operating expenses, profits, and these expected losses. The purpose of reserves in such cases is to protect
the companies against the unexpectedly heavy losses that may occur in any one year.
A social insurance program involves a number of different risks.
Assuming the correctness of the reserve principle, most of them do
not require the building up of any large reserves. It is only with
respect to the "old-age and survivors benefits" part of the program
that the desirability of building up a large reserve arises.
The issue here under consideration can be posed in the form of
a question. What premium policy is appropriate for a compulsory
old-age annuity program in a country in which the proportion of
old people will be considerably greater in the future than at the
time the program is inaugurated? Should the annual charge be
just sufficient to cover the administration and the annual payments
to those retiring from the labor force on account of age or should
the charge be designed to build up a large reserve? The policy
actually adopted in the United States in 1935 called for the building up of a very large reserve. In addition, since the program as a
whole was intended to be self-supporting, the annuities for older
"covered" workers had to be kept very low, and no provision at all
was made for those who had already retired on account of age or
who would retire later from occupations that were not included in

520

SOCIAL SECURITY

the program. The needy within these last two groups were to be
taken care of through a jointly financed federal-state public assistance program.
The unexpected complications that followed from this decision
will be described in the next chapter. Our concern here is confined
entirely to the wisdom of the decision to build up a large reserve in
connection with the old-age-insurance part of the compulsory insurance program.
Objections to a large reserve. The case for a large reserve derives, as we have seen, from the practice of the private insurance
companies. But a comprehensive and compulsory public program
is very different from a limited and private one. Hence it does not
follow that the procedure which is correct for the one is correct for
the other. There are at least three reasons why the "old-age and
survivors insurance benefits" part of our social security program
should be financed on a pay-as-you-go basis and not on the reserve
accumulation basis.
(1) It creates an illusion. The reserve principle cannot accomplish its alleged purpose of lightening the future burden of supporting more old people. This is because the reserves must be
invested exclusively in government bonds. These bonds do not
automatically produce interest. The interest will be forthcoming
only if the government raises additional taxes. What is saved in
premiums must be paid for in taxes. Reserve or no reserve, the selfsupporting in each generation must take care of their old people.
All that the reserve really does is alter the distribution of the burden, putting more of it on individuals as taxpayers and less on them
as premium payers. If the proportion of the population over 65
is going to be much greater 50 years hence than it is today (and
the experts assure us it will be), then the burden of supporting
this group is also going to be much greater. One of the objectionable features of a growing reserve is that it obscures this unpleasant
fact. It creates an illusion.
(2) It encourages overgenerous annuities. The illusion is unfortunate because it weakens popular resistance to the demand for
ever higher annuities. As we shall see presently, about one-fourth
of the civilian labor force is not under our compulsory old-age insurance program. Their inclusion now with annuity claims as high
as those of persons in the program from the beginning, plus the inclusion of the needy aged now receiving federal-state old-age benefits, would stop all further reserve accumulations, strengthen the
popular resistance to the constant pressure for higher annuities

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

521

(this is on the assumption that after the change any increase in
the level of annuities would require an immediate increase in the
level of premiums), shorten the period during which it is going
to be necessary to maintain a separate relief program for the needy
aged, and protect the next generation from being committed to
provide for its old people on a more generous scale than they can
afford.
(3) If retards the productive growth of the national economy.
The great increase in the proportion of the aged is, in any event,
going to put a heavy burden on the next generation. The best
way for this generation to help the next bear this burden is to save
and invest more now so as to pass on a more productive and betterequipped economy and a healthier, happier, and more proficient
work force. Extravagant public expenditures cut down productive
investment. A growing reserve invites precisely this kind of unproductive public expenditure. The annual excess of contributions
over benefits virtually forces the government to create new debt
since the trustees of the fund are forbidden to invest in the securities of private companies. The annual excess could, of course, be
invested in old obligations, thereby reducing the amount of the
national debt in the hands of the general public. But this course
is not likely to be pursued for any great length of time. Debt reduction is never as popular as increased spending, particularly when
the new spending does not involve new taxes. Under these circumstances the annual accumulations represent a direct invitation to
pursue a peculiarly insidious and objectionable form of invisible
financing. The government satisfies its needs without having to
"go to the market" or even to the Federal Reserve Banks.
This objection is not valid to the extent that the government's
use of the annual surpluses is just as productive as the uses to
which individuals would have put the money had it been returned
to them in the form of a reduction in the publicly held debt or in
the taxes paid to support the needy aged. Some government expenditures are as productive or even more productive than equivalent private investments. Such expenditures increase future
capacity to produce and hence increase the capacity of future
generations to support the growing burden of old age dependency.
But such constructive expenditures are likely to be made anyway.
A large reserve is an open invitation to undertake expenditures
which tend to increase present consumption at the expense of capital formation.
If this part of a social security program should be financed on a

522

SOCIAL SECURITY

pay-as-you-go basis, it follows that the whole program should be
so financed. The modifications in our own social security program
which will be suggested in the next chapter are based on this analysis of the reserve problem.
THE WELFARE PRINCIPLE
For those who object to the relatively large income inequalities
characteristic of an enterprise economy, the insurance approach to
social security has little appeal. It appears to involve an acceptance
of inequality, nay, a willingness to increase it by forcing persons
with very low incomes to save for contingencies which the wellto-do could provide for at less sacrifice. Consequently advocates
of the welfare approach prefer a program which is financed by a
direct and progressive income tax based on ability to pay, rather
than one financed by a flat premium based on the benefit principle.
Further they would use the proceeds of the tax not merely to make
good the income inadequacies arising out of the seven risks listed
at the beginning of this chapter, but also to raise all family incomes to some level which they regard as necessary for health,
efficiency, and general well being.
Possibilities and dangers. The economist, as economist, cannot
say definitely that such a program is inconsistent with the operating
requirements of an enterprise economy. The political scientist and
the psychologist are better equipped to provide us with the answer.
If they can assure us that it is politically possible for a democratic
government to guarantee a minimum cash income to all citizens,
and in addition relieve all citizens of heavy and irregular expenses
for such things as medical, hospital, and nursing care without capitulating to the inevitable pressures for more and more, then the
economist would have to say that such a tax-financed program
might be workable.
In that event it would be quite easy to imagine a broad security
program of admirable simplicity. The federal government might,
for example, issue weekly or monthly checks to all families in the
United States, based on the requirements for a really Spartan existence. The only condition for eligibility would be the submission each year of a detailed family income tax declaration. The
government would then levy a progressive income tax, which in
the case of each family would begin with the amount received over
and above the government annuity. Thus every family would be
assured of a tax-free minimum income, which would vary with the
size of the family. The income tax admittedly would have to be

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

523

heavy, but while we are allowing free play to our imaginations, we
can also imagine some substantial savings: no more public works
undertaken just for the sake of providing employment; no more
minimum wage and hour laws; no more restrictive union agreements; no more agricultural price supports and acreage restriction
programs; no more special programs for the needy aged, for dependent children, for the blind and the physically handicapped;
no more tariffs to protect high-cost enterprises. In brief, one can
imagine a highly competitive enterprise economy superimposed
upon a thin cushion of guaranteed income. Such a program would
render unnecessary a very large number of federal, state, and local
jobs. The resulting reduction in public expenditures would partly
offset the costs of the program.
But would a democratic people be so rational as to get rid of all
the nonconforming interventions which we have examined in earlier
chapters and those which we shall examine in the chapters that lie
ahead? And are there sufficient checks and balances in the democratic processes to prevent the majority from pushing the guaranteed minimum so high that the taxes on the well-to-do minority
would not destroy their willingness and their ability to provide the
risk capital and the entrepreneurial direction which an enterprise
economy must have if it is to satisfy the great expectations created
by its past performance?
When our colleagues, the political scientists and the psychologists, can convince us that such a program would not be abused,
we shall be ready to endorse the welfare approach to social security
and urge that it be carried to its logical conclusion. Until then,
our own view is that a reasonably adequate social security program can best be grafted onto an enterprise economy by emphasizing the insurance approach and by assigning as much of the
public responsibility as possible to the states and the localities.
This last point—the desirability of returning more responsibility
to the local units of government—seems to us to require amplification.
SOCIAL SECURITY AND FEDERALISM

Earlier in this chapter we noted the tendency of central governments to assume more and more of the responsibility for the
financing and administration of social security programs. Is this
trend desirable or undesirable in terms of its effects on an enterprise economy?
The following considerations speak in favor of a strengthening

524

SOCIAL SECURITY

of local responsibility. Experimentation is encouraged. Mistakes
affect local areas and can be corrected before they extend to the
entire nation. Successes can be copied. Programs can be fitted
to the needs of the several states. Efficiency and moderation are
promoted by the constant and powerful pressures of interstate competition. An individual state cannot afford to provide benefits that
increase the frequency and the duration of the events which cause
interruptions of income. To do so would put its business firms at
a competitive disadvantage in interstate as well as in intrastate
markets.
There are disadvantages connected with the state-by-state approach. The risks of pioneering are great. If the program adds appreciably to business costs, firms will migrate and insecurity will
be increased. The state-by-state approach may reduce population
mobility. A worker in a state which provides unemployment compensation, sickness and accident benefits, and old-age annuities
might hesitate to take a better job in a state without these security
measures. Or the influx of workers from other states might force
down wages and create unemployment.
But there are also disadvantages involved in turning the task
over to the federal government. First, there is the loss of the advantage that comes from state experimentation. Second, there is a
weakening of the restraints imposed by interstate competition. It
can be argued, of course, that international economic competition
will exercise the same restraining effects upon a central government
that interstate competition does on state governments. But this
does not necessarily follow. Central governments are not subject
to the restraints which the American Constitution places upon the
states. If a national welfare program prices business firms out of
international markets and threatens them within their domestic
markets, central governments can insulate their national markets
by tariffs, quota, exchange controls, and restrictions on immigration. There is probably a cause-and-effect relationship between the
development of national social security programs and the growth of
protectionism and national self-sufficiency.3 The reconciliation of
national social security and international cooperation through trade
is one of the unsolved problems of our times.
After this discussion of some of the issues of principle involved
in governmental security programs we turn now to an examination
of the American experiment.
8
Gustav Stolper, The German Economy, 1870-1940: Issues and Trends, Reynal &
Hitchcock, New York: 1940.

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

525

Questions:
1. Identify briefly (a) the sense in which the term "social security" is
used in the text; (b) the principal causes for insecurity; and (c)
ways in which individuals can provide security for themselves.
2. "The problem of individual insecurity simply does not exist in a socialist society." Argue for or against the correctness of this statement.
3. Defend or rebut the statement that the proportion of the people in
need tends to be greater in wealthy industrial countries than in poor
agrarian countries.
4. Identify the test which the text suggests for determining whether
a social security program is consistent with the operating requirements of a private enterprise system.
5. "The task of helping the needy was long regarded as an exclusively
local responsibility."
(a) Indicate the consistency of this position with the then prevailing social philosophy and the then dominant economic theory.
(b) Describe the changes in social philosophy and in economic
theory that have led to general acceptance of the idea that the central government should assume a larger share of the responsibility.
(c) Indicate specifically the impact of Keynesian theory on recent
developments in the social security field.
6. Present arguments for and against the proposition that a public and
compulsory social security program is consistent with the operating
requirements of a private enterprise system.
7. Present arguments for and against the proposition that a public and
compulsory old-age and survivors insurance program should be
financed on a pay-as-you-go and not on a reserve accumulation basis.
8. "The reconciliation of generous national social security programs
with the requirements of the international division of labor is one
of the unsolved problems of our times." Explain why the reconciliation has proved difficult.

37
The American
Social Security Program

OR many years past, public moneys have provided some elements of security to special groups.
Needy war veterans have always had access to the public purse.
Our federal government and many state and local governments
have pension systems for their permanent employees and they
usually pay salaries for limited periods of sickness. Most workers
are now protected by compulsory industrial accident insurance.
Groups of employees are covered against heavy hospital and medical expenses through voluntary payroll deduction programs. Millions of individual insurance policies provide some modest
continuity of income for many, perhaps most of the middle-income
group in the United States. Nonetheless, large numbers of the
people live from pay day to pay day. Any untoward event forces
them back on their more provident or more fortunate neighbors.
During The Great Depression which started in late 1929, the
number needing aid mounted rapidly. The old methods of local
help broke down. Many states were unable to pay their own employees or meet the interest on their public debts, let alone help
their bankrupt cities, towns, and counties. An emergency of unprecedented severity had created a problem too big to be handled
by local resources. Federal aid was essential.
The first response of the Administration then in power was to
create a Reconstruction Finance Corporation (1932) with authority
to lend to states, cities, and private business firms. The purpose of
the loans was to enable the borrowers to maintain employment and
thus to halt the mounting tide of need arising from unemployment.
526

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

527

There was no direct federal relief to persons, due to doubts regarding the constitutionality of such action. By the summer of 1932
the recession had been halted, but unemployment remained large
and the need for help continued to grow as more and more families
exhausted their savings. The November election of that year swept
a new Administration into power, with a popular mandate to help
people directly, and under a leadership which was not inhibited
by the constitutional doubts of the outgoing Administration.
Large-scale direct relief and work relief programs were launched.
Money was placed into the hands of farmers through the AAA as
described in an earlier chapter. The anti-trust laws were suspended,
and businessmen were forced (with very little holding back on
their part) into combinations to restrict output, raise prices, and
restore vanished profit margins. Unions were encouraged with a
view to giving workers a share in these profits. The dollar was
devalued, partly with a view to protecting the American market
from inundation by foreign goods attracted by the higher prices
which these salvaging operations were expected to provoke, and
partly with a view to recapturing foreign markets lost to our exporters.
For reasons into which it is not necessary to enter here, the recovery proved slow and incomplete. Unemployment declined
considerably, but remained at an unprecedentedly high level and
millions continued in need of help. It is against this background
that the social security program of 1935 must be examined.
THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT OF 1935
The social security program which was started in 1935 has been
amended a number of times and now provides for nine distinct programs that can be conveniently grouped under the following three
headings:
Social Insurance:
(a) Unemployment insurance
(b) Old-age and survivors insurance
Public Assistance to the Needy:
(a) Old-age assistance
(b) Aid to the needy blind
(c) Aid to the permanently and totally disabled
(d) Aid to dependent children

528

SOCIAL SECURITY

Children s Services:
(a) Maternal and child-health services
(b) Services for crippled children
(c) Child-welfare services
The primary objectives of these programs are "to keep families and individuals from destitution, to keep families together,
and to give children the opportunity to grow up in health and
security." *
The Social Security Act is a federal law, but the federal government
operates only one of the programs—old-age and survivors insurance. The
other eight programs are operated by the states, with the federal government cooperating and contributing to the cost.
Three federal agencies participate in the program. The Social Security
Administration of the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare administers, with the United States Treasury, the old-age and
survivors insurance program. The Social Security Administration participates also in public assistance and cooperates with the states in three
child-health and welfare programs. It is the Administration's duty under
the law to examine state programs and, if they conform to the Act, to
certify to the Treasury the payment of federal grants to the states.
Similarly, the Bureau of Employment Security in the United States
Department of Labor participates in the state-operated program of unemployment insurance and state employment services. In all these programs, the United States Treasury handles the federal money concerned.
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

Under the Social Security Act the administration of unemployment insurance is a joint concern of the states and the federal
government. Each state has, however, considerable freedom of
action with the result that we have 50 odd systems varying in detail but alike in essentials. There is space here for an account of
only the salient features of the programs.
The locus of control. The decision to place the main responsibility for the administration of unemployment compensation at
the state level was the outcome of technical, political, and, above
all, constitutional considerations. The recent outlawing of the NRA
(National Industrial Recovery Act) made it doubtful whether the
Supreme Court would uphold the constitutionality of a federal unHJ.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social Security: A Brief
Explanation of the Social Security Act, U.S. Government Printing Office, April, 1953.
The list of programs, the statement of objectives quoted in the text and the following
summary of the Act as a whole are taken verbatim from this bulletin.

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

529

employment compensation law. The same results, however, could
be accomplished through the federal power to tax and to spend.
Accordingly the federal law uses the tax-offset device described
below to induce all of the states to pass unemployment compensation laws conforming to minimum federal standards. The penalty
was so severe that every state promptly complied.
Coverage. To be entitled to unemployment compensation a
worker must have worked for a taxed employer (or employers) for
a minimum period of time and have earned a stipulated minimum in
wages immediately before his loss of employment. The federal Act
originally exempted seven types of employment of which the most
important were (and still are): self-employment, employment in
agriculture and domestic service, work performed for public
agencies and nonprofit organizations, and, finally, those working for
firms employing less than eight persons. The states may, however,
require broader coverage. In general, the tendency has been to include smaller firms. At the present time approximately 60 percent
of our civilian workers are potential beneficiaries of unemployment
compensation.
Level and duration of benefit. Each state is free to set up its own
benefit standards subject to the proviso that 90 percent of the tax
shall be devoted to the payment of unemployment compensation to
covered workers who are able and seeking work, and to the building
up of reserves against periods of unusually heavy unemployment.
All the states relate basic benefits to past earnings; all impose
waiting periods to penalize frivolous "quits" and to simplify administration, and termination dates to protect their reserves from
claims arising from structural unemployment. In general the state
laws aim at providing eligible workers with about one-half their
average weekly wages. A very few of the states take into account
workers' dependents in figuring benefits. Within an over-all maximum period the duration of benefits tends to depend upon the
previous earnings of the unemployed. Most states originally had a
maximum of 16 weeks; 20 to 26 weeks is much more common today.
States wishing to provide compensation for unemployment due to
sickness are now authorized to do so, provided they impose an additional tax on the employees.
Sanctions. Unemployment insurance is intended to provide compensation for unemployed persons who are able and willing to work
and are seeking work. The federal law requires that the states set
up employment offices, that all eligible unemployed workers register
with these offices, collect their weekly benefit checks at these offices.

530

SOCIAL SECURITY

and demonstrate the genuineness of their desire to work by trying
to get such jobs as the offices are able to draw to their attention.
This requires that the offices maintain lists of available job openings
and that they withhold certification for benefits to workers who refuse to accept reasonable offers. Just what constitutes a reasonable
offer or a "suitable job" is, of course, very difficult to determine and
still more difficult is the task of finding out whether an unemployed
worker really tried to get any of the jobs open to him.
Within limits each state sets up its own definitions and works out
its own methods of control. The federal law, however, specifies that
the state employment offices may not deny compensation to workers
who refuse to take jobs that are vacant because of a strike or because the rate of pay or other conditions of work are "substandard."
Private employers are required to report discharges to their local
employment offices and are urged to keep these offices informed of
vacancies and to use the offices as much as possible when hiring
workers. The extent to which employers make use of the employment offices varies from state to state. In general it is not very high.
Financing. The program in each state is financed by a state "excise" tax levied on the first $3000 of all wages and salaries in covered
firms. The federal government also levies a 3 percent tax on the
same base, but remits all but one-tenth of its tax if the state unemployment compensation law meets federal standards. Thus, in effect, the states levy the lion's share of a 3 percent payroll tax and the
federal government levies the remainder, with the state government
acting as the agent for the federal government. The proceeds of the
two levies are deposited in the Treasury of the United States and
become part of the general revenues of the government. Funds
equivalent to 0.3 percent of the payroll tax are available to cover
the administration of the state programs and the federal supervision. An Unemployment Trust Fund is credited with the balance
of the proceeds. Each state has a credit in the Fund equal to its
own collections on which it may draw at any time to pay unemployment benefits.
Experience rating. Originally the federal government kept the
difference between the state tax and its own 3 percent levy. The
states could thus not afford to impose a levy of less than 2.7 percent
on their own firms; the difference would accrue to the United States
Treasury. A subsequent amendment now authorizes the states to
reduce their levies below the 2.7 percent in the case of firms with
steady employment records, without losing their full credit on the
federal levy. This arrangement is known as "experience rating."

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

531

There is considerable division of opinion regarding the desirability
of the practice.
Opponents of experience rating argue that the ability to offer
stable employment is primarily due to the nature of the businesses
in which firms are engaged. If consumer demand for a product is
stable over time, the cyclical fluctuations in employment will be
small, whereas the converse will be true if consumer demand is
sensitive to cyclical forces. Since managements are not primarily
responsible for their high or low turn-over rates, they should be
neither rewarded nor punished by differences in their tax rates.
Moreover the 3 percent rate was fixed to provide the funds needed
to cover total unemployment claims. Reducing the rates for some
firms reduces the yield of the tax and threatens the solvency of the
states' unemployment compensation funds unless the rate on firms
with bad employment records is increased above the 3 percent level.
This increase, it is held, is undesirable because of the adverse effects
which a heavier tax would have on these firms. Finally it is argued,
that if firms are to be rewarded for improving their employment
records, then a firm in a cyclically sensitive industry which reduces
its annual turn-over from 30 to 20 percent is more entitled to a
rebate than one in a cyclically stable industry which reduces its
turnover from 12 to 10 percent.
Those favoring experience rating reply that it encourages firms to
stabilize their production and employment programs and that this
is a good thing for the economy as a whole. The firms contributing
to this result are entitled to tax relief. If other firms are unable to
stabilize their programs because of the inherent nature of their
markets, then the consumers should pay enough more for their
products to provide the added costs of protecting their workers. A
higher tax on such firms will work temporary hardships while resources are being transferred to the firms with steadier employment
records. Once the transfer is completed, profit margins in the stable
and the unstable sectors of the economy will tend to be equal and
the consumers and not the firms will be paying the additional tax in
the form of the higher prices they have to pay for the products of
the firms whose production and employment programs are inherently unstable. This argument, it will be noted, is consistent with
what we have elsewhere called the principle of responsibility.
Regardless of the merits of the controversy, experience rating is
now universal, with the result that the typical rates in 1951 were
between one and IV2 percent, instead of the 3 percent originally contemplated. These low rates have been sufficient to build up fairly

532

SOCIAL SECURITY

large reserves because of the high employment of the last decade.
What would happen should the country experience a serious depression remains to be seen.
OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE

This program is the exclusive concern of the federal government. Its purpose is to provide monthly annuities to workers and
their families when the wage earner is 65 years of age or older and
retires or to eligible survivors when he dies at any age. In general,
retirement from "covered employment" is a condition of eligibility
for benefits for persons under the age of 75. Between the ages of
65 and 74 earnings of up to $75 a month in covered employment are
disregarded. Beyond that age there is no limit on what a covered
worker may earn.
The program is financed by a flat tax on "covered" firms, levied
with respect to wage and salary payments below a certain level.
Originally this level was set at $3,000; it is now $3,600. Employers
are required to recover one-half of the tax from their employees by
payroll deductions. Covered workers receive social security numbers which they keep throughout the rest of their lives, and all payments by their present and subsequent employers (insofar as they
are liable to the tax) are posted to their accounts, which bear their
identification numbers. The rate started at 2 percent and was to rise
by 1 percent every two years until it reached a maximum of 6
percent.
The purpose of the tax is to finance the program, not to determine
the exact amount an individual will receive on retiring. The method
of calculating the basic annuity is too complicated to describe here.
In general it is based on the annuitant's "average monthly wage"
while in "covered employment" or in certain types of self-employment. The ceiling on taxable wages sets a ceiling on the annuity.
No provision was made in the 1935 Act for dependents during the
lifetime of an annuitant or after his death. Benefits were not to
start until 1942. Both of these provisions have since been changed.
Because of the doubtful constitutionality of linking the tax explicitly to annuity benefits, the Act provided that the revenues
would accrue to the Treasury and be merged with its general funds
and that the Congress would appropriate annually to an Old-Age
Retirement Fund an amount "determined on a reserve basis in accordance with accepted actuarial principles" sufficient to cover
present and future accrued liabilities. In practices the appropriations have always approximated tax collections less administrative

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

533

costs. The declaration indicates, however, that the Congress accepted the thesis that a compulsory insurance system should be
based on the reserve accumulation principle which private insurance
companies necessarily follow. According to estimates made at the
time the program was started, the reserve was expected to rise
gradually until it reached a figure in the neighborhood of $65 billion, after which payroll receipts plus interest on the securities in
the Reserve Fund would cover benefits and administrative costs.
Since the reserve funds can be invested only in federal bonds, and
since the 1935 federal debt was in the neighborhood of $42 billion,
it appeared at the time that it would only be a matter of years before the entire national debt would be held by the Fund. Thereafter, or even before, if the Fund's bids drove the interest rate on
outstanding obligations below the rate guaranteed by the Act
(2%%), the Treasury was obligated to issue special securities.
Inadequacy of 1935 program. This part of the over-all security
program was expected, in the course of time, to carry the main
burden of providing income continuity for the American people. In
fact, 15 years had to pass and many changes had to be made before
this could happen.
During this 15-year period the old-age insurance program contributed little to those for whom it was designed. This was due to
the narrow coverage of the Act, to the gearing of individual benefits
to individual earnings, and to the failure to make any provision for
those dependent on the covered worker.
Small coverage. For political and administrative reasons more
than half of all those of working age were excluded from the program. The exclusions were much the same as those for unemployment insurance, except that firms in covered industries were liable
to the tax if they employed a single worker. A worker's contributions provide nothing specifically for those legally dependent
upon him. All those already 65 and all workers in excluded occupations could never look forward to benefits under the plan, despite
the fact that they were probably contributing to its support in the
prices they were paying for the goods and services of the taxed firms.
Low and restricted benefits. The method of fixing benefits meant
that for many years older covered workers could earn only token
annuities. Furthermore there was no allowance whatever for the
dependents of a covered worker. Almost a whole generation would
have to pass before there could be any appreciable lightening of
the pressure of the needy aged on the public assistance part of the
program.

534

SOCIAL SECURITY

Evolution of the program. In 1939 annuities were increased to
take care of the wives, widows, and dependent children of retired
workers, and, under certain circumstances, of their dependent parents. Benefit levels were increased with older workers getting a
relatively larger increase, in terms of their contributions, than unmarried workers with high earnings who could look forward to a
long period of coverage. The higher tax rate was postponed, and
the beginning date for benefits was advanced to January 1, 1940.
Even after this increase a man retiring after 10 years of continuous service in a covered industry at an average wage of $200 per
month was entitled to a basic annuity of over $38 a month. The
annuity fell to $26 if he had worked half the time in an uncovered
industry.
In 1943 the higher tax rate was again postponed. In 1946 the survivors of veterans of World War II who died within three years of
discharge were made eligible to benefits if not entitled to benefits
under veterans laws. More and more people were thus being
brought within the system by virtue of their relationship to the
primary beneficiaries.
None of these changes, however, had increased substantially the
number of "covered" workers. Consequently the number of old
people receiving assistance on the basis of proved need under the
federally supported public assistance laws continued to increase
faster than the number receiving old-age annuities as a matter or
right. Moreover, the assistance grants, being based on need in a
period of inflation, tended to exceed the annuity benefits which
were still geared, although somewhat less strictly, to the annuitants'
past wages, and these were largely preinflation wages. Thus in
1949 the nation-wide average assistance benefit exceeded the average primary insurance benefit by 70 percent. Retiring workers who
had contributed one percent of their wages for nearly 15 years were
getting substantially less through the OASI program than those who
had never paid a penny in payroll taxes were getting through the
state assistance programs. The whole compulsory old age insurance
system was rapidly falling into disrepute.
The 1950 amendments. This situation led to a drastic revision
of the old-age insurance program in the 1950 Act. Compulsory
coverage was extended to the self-employed (with the exception of
farm operators and certain professional workers, such as lawyers,
doctors, and engineers), to farm wage earners and, under certain
conditions, to some federal employees and to employees of state
and local governments and private nonprofit organizations. These

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

535

changes added some 11 million to the rolls. The tax rate was set
at 3% for the next three years and the taxable wage base was raised
from $3,000 to $3,600. Annuities were increased by some 75 percent
on the average, with the largest increases going to older workers,
including those admitted at this time. Benefits of workers who had
already retired were almost doubled, with the average rising from
$26 to $46.
The 1950 amendments marked the final abandonment of the principle that each worker's old-age claim would be based on the amount
of his and his employer's contribution. All that was left was the
principle that, in the long run, total payroll taxes should cover total
benefit plus administrative costs. Within the insured group, benefits
are related to need, with the younger and the higher-paid workers
paying for part of the benefits of the older and lower-paid workers,
and those with numerous dependents. Current benefits come much
closer to current conceptions of adequacy.
By 1955 it is estimated that about one-third of those then over 65
will be in receipt of social security protection, one-third will have
adequate protection from other sources, and one-third will be on the
old-age public assistance rolls.
PUBLIC ASSISTANCE TO THE NEEDY

There are four programs falling under this heading: old-age assistance; aid to the blind; aid to the permanently and totally disabled;
and aid to dependent children. These are frankly welfare programs
involving transfers of income from the more to the less fortunate.
The federal government supports these programs through grantsin-aid.
Old-age assistance. The federal-state old-age assistance program
was regarded in 1935 as an interim measure to be used until such
time as a virtually universal old-age insurance program could be
worked out and matured to the point where contributions would
finance adequate annuities for all but a small minority of casual
workers. Meantime the primary responsibility for the needy aged
was to be left to the states with the federal government contributing enough to make it worth while for all states to cooperate.
The 1935 Act committed the Congress to match dollar for dollar
state grants to the needy aged up to a maximum of $15 a month.
The states had to bear all of the costs on grants in excess of $30 a
month. To qualify for federal aid, state governments were required
to meet minimum federal standards concerning such matters as the
tests to be used to determine eligibility, state responsibilities for the

536

SOCIAL SECURITY

administration and financing of assistance, the making of assistance
available in all political subdivisions, and the provision of an opportunity for a fair hearing by persons denied assistance. This last
provision elevated public assistance to the status of an enforceable
right. The question of adequacy was left to each state. Setting the
matchable maximum at $15 was intended to encourage states to pay
at least $30 a month to their needy aged. It was expected that the
wealthier states would pay more.
Evolution of the program. Between 1939 and 1952 the matchable
maximum was raised by successive stages from $30 to $55. These increases were to encourage the states to keep benefits in line with
the rising cost of living. Much more significant was the change in
the matching formula introduced in 1946. The new formula required the federal government to match $2 to $1 on the first $15
average (not individual) monthly payments, and one-half thereafter up to the maximum. Two years later the federal share was
raised to three-fourths of the first $20 average monthly payments,
and one-half of the balance. In 1952 the federal share was raised to
four-fifths of the first $25 and one-half of the balance up to the new
$55 ceiling.
Reasons for the variable matching formula. The purpose of the
change in the matching formula was to encourage the low-income
states to make more generous provision for their needy aged. Political considerations were doubtless influential, but there were also
some very respectable reasons for getting away from the flat 50-50
matching. The experience of the 1930s had shown that the federal
aid programs were actually hurting the low-income states. This un
expected and unintentional result was due to the fact that, as the
number of federally supported programs multiplied,2 the governments of the poorer states found it impossible to raise enough in
local taxes to take full advantage of the various offerings. Their position was like that of the dyspeptic at a 10-course banquet who is
forced to leave untouched most of the tempting dishes placed before
him. Mississippi, for example, paid only $9.21 per old-age recipient
2
Between 1926 and 1936, for example, federal grants and quasi-grants to the
states rose from about 4 percent to almost 27 percent of total federal expenditures
chargeable against ordinary receipts, and from less than 8 percent to more than 88
of state revenue. Their relative importance has declined since but is still very great
In 1952 federal grants-in-aid to the states amounted to 17.3 percent of total state
general revenues, ranging from 37.7 percent in Wyoming to 10.6 percent in Maryland. These grants according to a Task Force Report of the First Hoover Commission permit the federal government to influence and "to some extent control 75
percent of the total activities of state governments." Washington News Letter of the
Chamber of Commerce of the United States, August 7, 1953.

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

537

in 1942, whereas Connecticut paid $29.16. This meant that Connecticut received more than three times as much per case from the
federal government than did Mississippi. Connecticut residents also
contributed more in federal taxes, but from the point of view of the
burden on Mississippi taxpayers and the benfits to Mississippi's
needy aged, the situation appeared to be out of line with the generous impulses behind the old-age assistance program.
The new formula has corrected this situation only to create a new
one of more serious import.
The consequences of the variable formula. The variable formula
constitutes a wide-open invitation to the states to put as many old
people on the rolls as possible and to reduce the size of the average
grant.
The inflationary effects upon the rolls is illustrated by the contrasting policies of New Jersey and Louisiana. In 1949 both made
average assistance payments of about $47.50. New Jersey, however,
granted aid to only 65 in every 1,000 of its residents over 65 years of
age, while Louisiana put upon its rolls 670 per 1,000. One would expect the proportion in need to be higher in Louisiana than in New
Jersey, but not that much higher. This feat of getting two out of
three on the assistance rolls was largely accomplished by a state
ruling that the children of old people were not to be held responsible for the care of their parents. As a result Louisiana received
$37,099,000 from the Federal Treasury, while New Jersey drew only
$7,095,000, or less than one-fifth as much. How long can New Jersey
be expected to maintain its standards in the face of this competition?
The temptation to increase the drain on the federal Treasury can
be illustrated as follows: Let us assume that there are 100,000 persons, age 65 or over, in a state that is paying out $50 a month on the
average to 20,000 of these old people. Since the federal government
pays four-fifths of the first $25 and one-half of the balance, the federal share of each old age grant is $32.50 and the state's share is
$17.50. It follows that the average grant per aged inhabitant is onefifth of $50, or $10, and of this the state pays $3.50. If the state
should now decide to pay out one-half as much to twice as many of
its old people—to 40,000 instead of to 20,000—the average grant per
aged inhabitant would still be $10, but the state's share would be
cut almost in half—from $3.50 to $2.00. This change in policy would
cost the state only $10,000, but it would bring an additional $190,000
of federal funds into the state.3
Public assistance to dependents and handicapped. The Federalstate Public Assistance program originally (1935) provided aid for

538

SOCIAL SECURITY

only the blind and dependent children. Then in 1950 the totally disabled and adults taking care of dependent children were made eligible.
The matching provisions for the blind were the same as for the
needy aged and have always remained the same. Originally the
federal share of grants to dependent children was one-third instead
of one-half. This led many states to deal more generously with their
aged and blind than with their dependent children. In 1939 the
equal matching formula was applied here, and the age of dependency was raised from 16 to 18 years. In 1946 the variable formula
was introduced into all these programs, and, as in the case of the
old-age assistance, the amounts which the federal government
would match were raised to keep pace with the rise in the cost of
living.
The residual program. The insurance and assistance programs
make no provision for the needs of those over 18 and under 65 who,
for one reason or another, are out of jobs and are not covered by
unemployment compensation or not protected by their relationship
to a protected worker. They have to rely on the types of local relief that were traditional in the 19th century. The federal government is not involved. Each state is completely free to do what local
public opinion deems most appropriate.
CHILDREN'S SERVICES

Under the Social Security Act the Federal Government participates in the three maternal and child welfare programs mentioned
at the outset of this chapter: maternal and child health services;
services for crippled children; and child welfare services. Here the
objective is service rather than the maintenance of some level of
income continuity.
The primary responsibility for these services rests with the states.
State agencies draw up the plans and submit them for approval to
the Children's Bureau—one of the operating divisions of the Federal
Social Security Administration. If approved, federal funds are made
available on a matching basis. During thefiscalyear 1951, the states
received approximately $30 million from the federal government
toward the support of these services.
We are not concerned here with the details of these programs.
One point does interest us, however. The complicated matching
formulas for all of these programs are deliberately designed to channel federal funds primarily into the rural areas of the several states
and to provide relatively more to the low-income states than to the

THE AMERICAN SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAM

539

wealthy states. Thus the Federal Public Assistance program and the
Federal Children's Services program now bring about a substantial
regional redistribution of income in favor of the more agrarian
states, with the old South as the principal beneficiary. It is very
doubtful, however, whether all of these programs shift as much
purchasing power from the wealthier to the poorer parts of the
country as the people in these parts of the country could earn if
other federal measures were repealed which discourage rather than
promote interstate trade.
Questions:
1.

Identify the types of need covered by the original social security
Act of 1935. What types of need have since been added? What situations are still left exclusively to voluntary or public local action?

2.

Discuss the American unemployment compensation programs under
the following headings.
(a) the considerations that led to assigning the major administrative
responsibility to the states;
(b) the method of financing the program;
(c) the means at the disposal of the federal government for inducing the states to pass unemployment compensation laws and to accept certain minimum standards;
(d) experience rating and its consistency with the insurance principle;
(e) the impact, if any, of unemployment compensation on employment and on wages;
(f) the possibility of using unemployment compensation to reduce
popular resistance to tariff reductions.

3.

(a) Explain the basis for the statement in the text that developments
between 1935 and 1950 were such as to discredit the OASI program.
(b) What changes have since been made in the program to correct
the situation?

4.

Explain the reasons for the shift from the flat 50-50 matching formula
in the federal-state assistance programs and discuss the effects on
(a) the federal budget, (b) the level of assistance, (c) inter-regional
capital movements, and (d) the vitality of federalism.

5.

Argue for or against the thesis that the state governments would
not continue adequate general assistance programs in the absence
of federal aid, even if the federal government assumed the entire
burden of the present OASI program.

PART NINE

American Foreign
Economic Relations

38
The Historical Background

JLHE 75 years from roughly 1840
to World War I were the golden age of liberalism in the original
meaning of that term. Unlike the preceding age of mercantilism,
men placed their primary reliance on free prices and market competition, and not upon detailed government edicts for the solution
of most of their economic problems. Narrow nationalism appeared
to be giving way to a broad and generous cosmopolitanism. Economists of liberal persuasion the world over proclaimed that the
freedom of consumers to buy in the cheapest markets and the freedom of producers to sell in the dearest markets would contribute
to the wealth of nations and the peace of the world. International
trade was not completely free, but tariffs were, on the whole, moderate and frequently "bound" by treaties for considerable periods of
time.1 Increasingly, the foreign and domestic economic policies of
the leading countries were geared to the requirements of the market.
Today we are far closer to 18th century mercantilism than to
19th century liberalism. National state planning is again in vogue.
Production and trade are highly regulated. Commodity prices, interest rates, rents, and profits are completely controlled in many
countries and to some extent in all countries. It is true that the
advantages of international trade based on comparative advantage
are officially recognized, but national economic policies are, in fact,
dominated by the same balance-of-payments preoccupations that
inspired so much of the planning of the age of mercantilism. Gone
is the faith that market forces will automatically correct the disequilibria which arise when a people buy abroad more than they
can pay for.
1
The United States never entered into such treaty arrangements, but, by present
standards, our tariff revisions were relatively infrequent.

543

544

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

The liberal theory of international trade was described in Chapter
25. Here we propose to trace the development of American foreign
economic policy, assay our responsibility for the world-wide return
to neomercantilism, describe and evaluate post-war efforts to restore
international trade by purposive state action, and suggest a foreign
economic policy that would be consistent with the kind of economic
system we seek to foster domestically.
AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY: PRIOR TO 1920

Up to about 1920 our foreign economic policy was reasonably
consistent with our domestic economic system.
International labor and capital movements encouraged. With the
exception of exclusions directed against the Chinese and the Japanese, on the ground that their eventual biological assimilation was
impossible (or undesirable), immigration was encouraged, and residents of the United States were free to settle in almost any part of
the world, if they so desired. Similarly our laws were designed to
make the United States attractive to foreign capital; it enjoyed the
same legal protection accorded domestic capital. Principal and earnings could be withdrawn at will. The international gold standard
reduced the risks inherent in international investment. Nor were
there any legal barriers placed on the export of American capital.
In brief, there was very considerable international mobility of labor
and capital during this period. Two of the prerequisites of economic
liberalism were thus satisfied.
Imports discouraged. With respect to commodity movements,
however, our policy was illiberal. From the very beginning of our
history as an independent nation, we insisted upon protecting the
home market. We can only guess at what would have happened
had we used our tariffs for revenue purposes only.2 Doubtless our
industrial development would have been slower, but the industries
which did develop would have rested on the firm basis of absolute
or comparative advantage, and our farmers and raw material producers would have gained because of the greater foreign demand
for their products and the lower prices they would have paid for
manufactured products.
Early effects not serious. Nonetheless the effects of our protectionist policy were not serious as long as we were a borrowing country in the early stages of industrial development. The foreign capital
2

A country's tariffs are said to be for revenue only if they are levied only on goods
not capable of being produced domestically, or if internal taxes are placed on domestically produced goods equivalent in weight to those placed on imported goods.

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

545

invested within this country enabled us to buy abroad the rails, the
engines, the machinery and equipment needed for our developing
industries and our rapidly expanding labor force. Tariff duties were
nondiscriminatory as between countries, were changed at rather infrequent intervals, and, while high, were, for the most part, not absolutely prohibitive. Hence the pressure of international competition
tended to direct our internal development into the lines which conformed reasonably well with the principle of comparative advantage. The economic integration of the great trading nations went
forward. Up until the very eve of World War I it seemed possible
to look forward to the emergence of an interdependent world in
which peace would rest upon the foundation of mutual self-interest,
and not upon the capacity of national governments to create a supergovernment with the power to outlaw economic nationalism.
Tariffs do not strike at the roots of the private enterprise system.
They slow down but they do not prevent the price mechanism from
integrating a borrowing country in the infant-industry stage of its
development into a larger international economy. But a country
which borrows from abroad and invests wisely does not remain indefinitely either in the infant-industry stage or in the debtor stage.
As such a country approaches industrial maturity, domestic investment opportunities multiply, and some industries must be sacrificed if others are to grow. There is not enough man power, capital,
and know-how available to push forward on all fronts. The continued protection of perennial infant industries hurts a country's
efficient industries by increasing the prices they must pay for resources and by decreasing the foreign demand for their products.
Nor does such a country remain indefinitely in the early debtor
stage during which foreign loans enable it to buy from abroad more
than it can pay for by current exports. In time, interest and dividend payments due foreigners on old investments exceed in value
new borrowings. When this stage is reached, a country either defaults on old obligations and thereby destroys its capacity to attract
foreign capital, or it develops an excess of exports over imports on
current account. The "balance of trade" shifts from unfavorable to
favorable. This shift in our international position came in the 1870s.
Thereafter we had a favorable balance on current account which
was large enough to permit us to service old obligations, pay off
some of them as they matured, and finally to begin making investments in other countries. As we approached the end of this period
the United States was slowly but surely working itself out of its
debtor position. We were coming of age industrially. It was only

546

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

a matter of time before we would join the ranks of the mature
creditor countries, which must necessarily have unfavorable balances on current account.
Had World War I not occurred, the transition from debtor to
creditor position would have extended over many years. This would
have given us time to adjust our internal economy, our thinking,
and our policies to our new responsibilities. In 1913 we did make
substantial reductions in our tariffs. But then came the first of the
great modern world wars, and when it was over, the United States
stood supreme, the world's mightiest industrial country and the
greatest of the creditor countries. We attained this position because
we were able to expand simultaneously our agricultural and industrial capacity and we were willing to hold down our own consumption and release much of our increased output to our associates in
the war, taking in return claims against them, collectible at some
future time. These claims were created by our exports; they could
be collected only by our imports. Their economic validity thus depended, to a considerable extent, upon our future foreign economic
policies.
AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY: 1920-1932

At the war's end the greatest single contribution we could have
made to a sound world recovery would have been to lower further
our protective tariffs, and to have given assurances that duties would
not be raised as industries in the borrowing countries returned to
peacetime production and succeeded in penetrating the American
market. This was a hard decision to make because, during the war,
enterprises had developed which could not stand the test of international competition. Their losses would have been heavy, and
there would have been considerable unemployment before the workers of these industries found new jobs.
We raise tariffs. In the decade following the war we raised our
tariffs twice. The Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922 undid the tariff
reductions of Woodrow Wilson's first Administration. The HawleySmoot tariff of 1930 carried protectionism to the highest level in our
history. We thus made it economically difficult and politically almost impossible for our debtors to honor the close to $10 billion
which our government had lent them in the common struggle
against Imperial Germany. Our private foreign investments were
also jeopardized. To get over our high tariff walls foreign firms had
to offer their products at lower prices than would otherwise have
been necessary. This had an adverse effect on real wages abroad.

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

547

Furthermore, the protectionist temper of the American people, and
the known willingness of the Congress to provide additional protection to any industry which claimed to be seriously hurt by foreign
competition made foreign businessmen doubt the wisdom of spending money on the advertising and developmental programs which
are always involved in the opening up of new markets. It is not
surprising, therefore, that public opinion in the debtor countries
came to regard as unreasonable our insistence upon the repayment
of war debts incurred in the common cause.
We restrict immigration. Throughout most of our history immigration was actively encouraged. Some 33 million persons, mostly
from northern and western Europe, entered this country in the 100year period, 1820-1919. It was not until the closing decades of the
19th century that restrictions were placed upon the entry of the
Chinese and the Japanese. These restrictions were motivated in
part by protectionism—the unwillingness of American workers to
accept the terms on which Chinese and Japanese immigrants were
willing to work—and in part by the conviction that their biological
assimilation was impossible or undesirable. Here matters stood until
the close of World War I. Then, and over the veto of President
Wilson, quota restrictions were applied to immigrants from almost
all countries. The quotas cut down sharply the number who might
enter from countries that had supplied few immigrants prior to
1890 and had little effect upon the others.
There are sound sociological and political reasons why our wideopen door policy could not be continued indefinitely. Nonetheless
the sudden and drastic reversal of our historic policy had farreaching internal and international effects. The repercussions in
Europe were particularly severe.
The whole of the European economy was, at the time, dependent
upon its ability to ship part of its net population increase abroad,
much as the Southeast today depends on migration to help solve its
problem. From the 1890s on, this emigration had been predominantly from the overcrowed farms of southern and eastern Europe
—agrarian Europe. When we suddenly closed our doors to immigration, the agrarian countries promptly erected exorbitant tariffs on
manufactured goods in an endeavor to develop substitute jobs at
home. This action destroyed the export markets on which the industrial countries of northern and western Europe—industrial Europe—had come to depend. Earning less of the moneys of agrarian
Europe, industrial Europe had less to spend for the agricultural
products of agrarian Europe. Consequently farm prices in the agrar-

548

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

ian countries fell to very low levels. The solvency of the agrarian
groups in industrial Europe was now threatened. They demanded
and secured prohibitive agricultural tariffs. The final outcome was
the disintegration of the European economy and the impoverishment of the European peoples. Had we opened our domestic market
to the products of Europe as we closed the door to her people, the
effects would not have been as disastrous. But we did not do this.
Instead, as already noted, we raised our tariffs on competitive products to prohibitive levels.
We promote self-determination. Our encouragement of territorial
settlements based on the principle of self-determination proved unfortunate from a purely economic point of view. It led to the creation of a large number of small and highly nationalistic states whose
domestic markets were too small to permit the use of the mass production techniques upon which high productivity and high living
standards depend. If we had opened our own internal market, and
if these new states had refrained from erecting tariff barricades
around theirs, this political balkanization would have had no adverse economic consequences. But neither of these things happened.
We closed our market to their goods and their peoples, and they
closed theirs; further they used their reparation claims and foreign
loans to provide themselves with the plant and equipment needed
to make themselves independent of their old sources of supply. A
world-wide but unsound prosperity prevailed during this building-up period, but, since these new national economies did not mesh
together, a collapse was bound to ensue the moment the lending
ceased. When it came, the resulting disillusionment and distress
led to the return to authoritarian government in many parts of the
world and to divisive national planning everywhere. Our tariff and
immigration policies during this period undoubtedly contributed
to these unfortunate developments.
Reparations and inter-allied debts. German reparations also contributed to the world-wide return to protectionism. To pay them,
Germany had to develop a large favorable balance of trade, and the
countries receiving reparations had to be willing to accept large
quantities of goods "made in Germany." Some domestic firms were
bound to get hurt. They demanded protection. It was difficult for
their governments to resist these demands in view of the widespread
fear and distrust of Germany. Tariffs were raised with the result
that public opinion in Germany came to believe that the victors
were not interested in the restoration of the damages wrought by
German armies, but rather in keeping the reparation claims intact

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

549

because many of the restrictions on German sovereignty were to be
continued until the reparation claims had been paid.
While we exacted no reparations from Germany, our insistence
upon the repayment of the war debts prevented an early solution
of the reparations impasse. It was politically impossible for the governments in power in countries with claims against Germany to
make any large concessions unless they could tell their people that
their late ally had made equivalent concessions to them. Thus reparations and American debt claims remained on the books throughout the 1920s and contributed to the exaggerated protectionism
which developed during that fateful decade.
We buy off depression. Our decision to raise tariffs and restrict
immigration was due in considerable part to fear of large-scale unemployment after the war. These measures could not, of course,
prevent unemployment; they could only change its incidence. Their
first effect was to cut down our imports. The cut in imports reduced
foreign dollar earnings and hence the foreign demand for the products of our efficient industries. It thus tended to create unemployment in these industries and forced us to look to our less efficient
ones to absorb the displaced workers. Thus our fears led us to adopt
a policy which was calculated to increase the volume and the duration of unemployment, reduce the productivity of our economy,
needlessly lower living standards, and retard world recovery.
The developments of the 1920s do not invalidate this conclusion.
The war years had been a period of high economic activity. The
peak or upper turning point was reached in the late summer of
1918, followed by a mild recession which reached its low point in
the spring of 1919 (April), with the armistice at about the midpoint. The first postwar business cycle, April 1919 to July 1921,
was the briefest and most violent in our experience up to that time.
The expansion phase lasted only 9 months with its upper turning
point falling in January, 1920. The ensuing contraction, which
lasted just twice as long, gave a complete cycle of only 27 months,
as compared with the average of 48 months for the preceding 16
cycles.
These developments showed that tariffs and immigration restrictions could not ward off unemployment; that the country might
have to go through a long and serious depression before the expansion of our less efficient industries could take up the employment
slack.
Yet, in fact, the recovery started long before the readjustment
had been accomplished. Taken as a whole, the 8 years, 1922-29

550

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

inclusive, were prosperous in this country3 and in most foreign
countries.
This prosperity was not the result of any "effective demand"
created by federal deficits. On the contrary, federal expenditures
and federal taxes were both cut drastically, and the national debt
was reduced by about one-third. It is obvious, therefore, that the
activity of the 1920s was sustained entirely by private investment,
and investment by state and local governments.
There was, in fact, an enormous investment boom in the United
States. But, in our judgment, it was the foreign orders financed by
our large private foreign investments that maintained employment
in our efficient export industries and prevented them from dragging
the national economy as a whole into a depression. Private foreign
lending during the 1920s played the role that federal deficits were
destined to play in the next decade. In the eight years, 1922 through
1929, Americans invested abroad close to $10 billion. These funds
also sustained activity abroad, but involved American investors in
heavy losses when the flow fell below the amounts required to service the earlier investments. The only thing which could have prevented widespread defaults was a great increase in imports relative
to exports, and this our tariff increases of the 1920s made impossible.
The Great Depression started in the fall of 1929 in this country,
and by 1931 it had swept through the entire world. The dollar value
of international trade fell by 75 percent, and, according to a League
of Nation's estimate, some 31 million nonfarm workers were unemployed. In the United States alone there were more than 8 million
unemployed. Two years later this figure had swelled to almost 13
millions. We had bought eight years of artificial prosperity at the
price of a world-wide collapse so severe as seriously to weaken
public confidence in the workability of private capitalism.
AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY:
1932 TO WORLD WAR II

In preceding chapters we discussed the New Deal program for
domestic recovery. We noted the restrictionist and protectionist
character of many of the measures. Labor and management in the
older industrial regions sought and secured protection from the
competition coming from the industrially underdeveloped South.
Paradoxically this same New Deal reversed the restrictionist and
protectionist tariff policy of the Republican Party, and attempted to
3 Great Britain alone failed to share in this worldwide prosperity and for reasons
that will become clear as we proceed.

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

551

restore international competition through tariff reductions. This
inconsistency was self-defeating. We achieved neither our domestic
objective of full employment nor our foreign relations objective of
restoring international trade.
The Reciprocal Trade Agreement Program. Reducing tariffs is

very difficult in a democracy, even though a substantial majority
favor tariff reductions in principle. Congressmen take it for granted
that they will lose the votes of those who might get hurt, and they
cannot be sure that they will win the votes of those who will be
benefited. This is due to the fact that the damages are direct, immediate, and obvious, whereas the benefits are indirect, delayed,
and diffused. It requires great political courage for a Congressman
to vote to reduce the rates on products directly affecting his constituents. Hence he bargains with his fellow Congressmen, agreeing to vote tariff protection for the products in which they are
interested in return for similar favors when the products in which he
is interested come up for consideration. In the absence of a rigid
party discipline, an Administration pledged to reduce the tariff
simply cannot carry out its promise. It is as difficult for a democratically elected body to fix individual tariff rates in the national
interest as it is to fix individual freight rates.4 The national interest
is bound to be sacrificed to special sectional interests.
The Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act of 1934 got around this
practical political difficulty by delegating to the President power
to fix individual tariff rates. The delegation ran for three years, reductions were not to exceed 50 percent of those set forth in the 1930
Hawley-Smoot Act and they were to be granted only in return for
equivalent tariff reductions by other countries. These reductions
were to be negotiated by the Department of State and were to be
embodied in trade treaties which were to go into effect without
further Congressional approval. The procedure necessarily involved
a series of bilateral bargains. In order that these bargains should
not bring about any departure from our traditional policy of according equal treatment to products entering our markets, regardless of
their points of origin, and of demanding equal treatment of our
products in foreign markets (i.e., "most-favored-nation" treatment),
the Act required that the contracting parties accord the duty reductions to all other countries which did not discriminate against their
own nationals. In this fashion it was hoped that piecemeal tariff
4

In 1887 the United States Congress delegated its power to fix individual freight
rates to the Interstate Commerce Commission in accordance with broad general directives.

552

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

reductions would result in a world-wide reduction of tariff barriers.
This was a notable shift in policy. Unfortunately it came too
late to reverse the general trend to protectionism. Tariff reductions
have little effect once countries start using the more drastic restrictionist techniques of import quotas, exchange rationing, bulk buying
on government account, and currency depreciation. And this is precisely what most countries did during the 1930s. The result was that
the national recoveries of that period were, in general, incomplete
and turned inward toward national self-sufficiency. A large part of
the gains of territorial specialization made during the 19th century
and subsequently lost were not recovered.
Moreover our reversal of policy was never complete enough to
inspire great confidence abroad. The Congressional delegation of
power, although repeatedly renewed, was always for brief periods.
This meant that concessions could always be terminated if any important domestic interest was seriously hurt. The maintenance of
the "Buy American" Act of 1933 provided further evidence of the
lukewarm desire of the Congress to expand international trade
through the opening up of the American market.
Thus, despite a reduction of almost one-third in the average
burden imposed on all dutiable imports, our effort to restore world
trade failed. More and more, national planning became the order
of the day, and it became increasingly apparent that governments,
acting singly, could neither reconstruct the old pattern of territorial
specialization nor work out a new one. The high hopes engendered
by the war which was to "end war" and make the world "safe for
democracy," and nurtured by the artificial prosperity of the 1920s,
gave way to disillusionment, despair, and distrust of democracy and
of private enterprise. Increasingly peoples surrendered their destinies to governments in exchange for promises of a security which
these governments were powerless to fulfill.
THE HERITAGE OF WORLD WAR II
World War II lasted longer than World War I, and the material
destruction was much greater and more diffused. Nonetheless there
were good reasons for hoping for an early recovery, and for a resumption of the steady material recovery which had been taken for
granted in the age of economic liberalism.
Grounds for optimism. Technological progress. The first reason
for optimism was the technological progress fostered by the war
itself. As early as 1942, Dr. Charles M. A. Stine of the vast Du Pont
organization, had pointed out in an address that "the pressures of

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

553

this war are compressing into the space of months developments
that might have taken a half-century to realize, if necessity had not
forced the pace . . . Already . . . our world of 1940 . . . is so distant
in the past that it has become an antiquity, as seen through scientific
eyes."5 And this was before science had discovered how to release
the enormous energies locked within the atom. Thus at war's end
man was at the threshold of an almost unlimited source of power.
Properly managed it could very literally abolish poverty wherever
people were capable of handling modern equipment and modern
organizational problems, provided they were prepared to merge
narrow national markets into large international markets, and to
curb their birth rates.
The promise of American leadership. Equally encouraging was
the apparent evidence that the American people were prepared to
encourage international trade and to assist people everywhere to
develop their resources.
Our conduct during the war appeared to confirm the reality of
our conversion to internationalism. As in the previous war it was
the supplies flowing from our factories, our mines, and our farms
that made the final victory certain. But this time our help was given
in such fashion as to leave in its wake no burdensome debt heritage.
Altogether we contributed approximately $40 billions under lendlease to the common cause. In return, all that we required of the
governments receiving this assistance was that they should agree in
advance to eliminate after the war "all forms of discriminatory treatment in international commerce" and to "reduce tariffs and other
trade barriers."
The successful establishment of a new world organization, the
United Nations, our entry into it with overwhelming Congressional
majorities (in contrast to our refusal to join the old League of Nations), and our willingness to channel over $3 billion of relief
through an agency of the United Nations—the United Nations Relief
and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA)—all these developments provided a further earnest of the genuineness of our desire to
build an international authority capable of capturing the imagination and the loyalty of men everywhere, and thus of providing the
political and psychological bases for a lasting peace.
Our debtor position. Even before our entry into the war, we had
renounced in effect our World War I debt claims; and a large part
of our claims arising from the private investments of the 1920s had
5

"Molders of a Better Destiny," Chemical and Engineering News. The address
was widely distributed without a dateline. It was given in September, 1942.

554

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

been cancelled by bankruptcies or reduced by voluntary settlements.
Thus at the end of the war, and despite our large favorable balance
of trade on current account, we emerged as a debtor country.
Neutrals, in particular, held large dollar balances, resulting from
their sales to belligerents and to us and their inability to get anything from us in exchange that did not contribute to the successful
conduct of the war. These large demand liabilities exceeded our
long-term investments abroad.
At war's end an exhausted world stood in great need of American
assistance. It was desirable that we should continue for a limited
period to export much more than we imported. Had the outside
world been heavily in our debt we could not have done this unless
we were prepared to invest abroad immediately and heavily or continue with our international grants-in-aid. The current claims
against us provided a valuable breathing space during which plans
could be laid for restoring the normal flow of commerce and for
establishing the political and economic bases for normal international lending.
Grounds for skepticism. Despite these solid grounds for optimism
—the technological developments fostered by the war, our apparent
conversion to internationalism, and our technical position as the
world's debtor—there were formidable obstacles standing in the
way of an early recovery.
Faith in national planning. In the first place the temper of the
people everywhere showed that they were not willing to let competitive market forces direct their resources in accordance with the
principle of comparative advantage. There was a tendency everywhere to look to governments to work out the task of international
integration through political negotiations. Could national plans be
reconciled in this fashion? How were the planners of a country to
know whether the world's interests would best be served by abandoning industries A, B, and C and concentrating on industries D,
E, and F, in the absence of convertible currencies, price comparisons, and international competition? And if they knew, could they
implement their knowledge?
On this fundamental issue there was no international meeting of
minds. The official American position was in favor of a return to
a free market economy, with international trade conducted on the
basis of stable and freely convertible currencies and moderate and
nondiscriminatory tariffs. We declared our opposition to the use
of quotas, import and export licensing systems, foreign exchange
rationing, exchange depreciation for protectionist purposes, bulk

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

555

buying on government account, and similar devices, on the ground
that they were inconsistent with the requirements of an international
market economy.
Yet Great Britain after the war, and, only to a lesser extent, Holland and the Scandinavian countries, had embraced a form of democratic socialism which involved over-all national economic planning
and the use of these very devices for the execution of their plans.
Would not these differences in approach provoke conflict instead of
cooperation?
The fetish of full employment. Another obstacle to world integration was the grip which the doctrine of full employment had upon
the public in all countries. International trade, when not interfered
with, imposes constant changes upon national economies, and
change always involves some unemployment. Invention and innovation proceed at an uneven pace and expose laggard firms to sudden and unwelcome competition. The broader the trading area, the
more frequent will be the disturbances arising from dynamic forces.
A government committed to maintaining full employment at any
cost will find it difficult to resist the demand for protection from the
managements and the workers in industries which are forced to
contract because foreign competitors have discovered new and better ways of production.
The French Constitution adopted after World War II imposed upon
the French government the responsibility for maintaining full employment. The coalition wartime government of Winston Churchill solemnly
declared that it would assume responsibility for full employment after the
war and the avowedly socialist Labor Pary which held office from 1945
to the end of the decade regarded the maintenance of full employment as
more important than the socialization of the instruments of production.
Article 22 of the Israeli Constitution guarantees the right to work. While
our own Employment Act of 1946 did not go so far as to guarantee employment it did strengthen the popular expectation that the administration in power could and should maintain employment at a high level.
The United Nations Charter makes membership in that organization conditional, nominally at least, on acceptance of government responsibility
for domestic full employment.
It may be argued that general acceptance of this responsibility
provided encouraging evidence of the existence of an international
consensus. At war's end this was the popular view. The experiences
of the next few years, however, were to demonstrate the difficulty
of reconciling government-contrived full employment with the restoration of international trade.

556

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

The gospel of equality. Another obstacle grew out of the excessive expectations aroused by the popularizations of the doctrine of
"effective demand/' Particularly significant from the international
point of view were those formulations of the doctrine which stressed
income inequality as an important cause of chronic unemployment
and progressive taxation as a major corrective. If taking from the
rich to help the poor within a single country would make that country wealthier, without leaving the rich any worse off than they
would have been had gross inequalities been tolerated, did it not
follow that a transfer of wealth from rich to poor countries through
political grants-in-aid would make the world wealthier, without requiring any real sacrifice of the people in the wealthy countries?
This view is very widespread. It is not surprising, therefore, that
the peoples and the governments in many of the industrially underdeveloped countries tended to look on "development . . . as something which is due as a right from the more advanced nations to
those less well developed," rather than as something which "can
only be won internally by acceptance of responsibility, hard work,
and sacrifice." 6 As we shall see presently, this attitude has complicated postwar recovery.
International communism. But the chief reason for the skepticism
which soon developed regarding the prospects for peace and an
early recovery was due to developments in Russia. These developments quickly shattered the hopes of the many friends she had won
for herself in the democratic West. Whether her motive was world
domination, as many claimed, or simply a quest for national security,
as some affirmed, Russian expansion into the power vacuum left by
the sudden and complete collapse of Germany and Japan aroused
intense fears regarding the solidity of the territorial states within
striking distance of her vast land forces. This fear made impossible
the expected relief from the burden of armament which had figured
in the high expectations of an early recovery; in addition it created
a formidable investment road block. Foreigners will not make costly
and durable investments in areas which cannot be defended, particularly when it is known that the invaders do not respect private
property rights in the areas they take over.
SUMMARY
American foreign economic policy was reasonably consistent with
the kind of market economy we were trying to preserve at home up
6
This warning note was sounded by the President of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development at the Fifth Annual Meeting of the Directors.

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

557

to the beginning of the first World War. The exaggerated tariffs of
the 1920s were contrary to our national interest, inconsistent with
our new creditor position, and were in part responsible for the
severity and the duration of the depression which ushered in the
1930s. During that decade there developed a serious inconsistency
between our internal protectionist policies and our foreign policy as
embodied in the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Program. Our foreign
economic policy over the next five years was animated by a determination to win a great war and to create an international agency
capable of keeping the peace and promoting social and economic
progress throughout the world. In the next two chapters we shall
discover that the same inconsistencies which nullified our 1930
efforts to rebuild a peaceful and prosperous world have to date
plagued our postwar efforts.
Questions:
1. Explain how market forces, when allowed to operate freely, tend to
force regions within countries, and countries themselves, to specialize
and exchange goods and services on the basis of comparative advantage.
2. "High tariffs reduce international specialization and international
trade more if they are imposed by a mature creditor country than
by a country in the early debtor stage of its development/' Explain.
3. Describe in broad outlines the world pattern of international trade
as it existed prior to the first world war and explain why our trade
and immigration policies were in part responsible for the inability
of market forces to restore this pattern during the decade of the
1920s.
4. The period of the 1920s was one of great prosperity in the United
States. Argue for or against the proposition that the tariff was responsible for this prosperity.
5. "Tariff reduction is difficult to achieve in a democracy."
(a) If you think this is true explain why.
(b) What method was adopted in the early days of the New Deal
for getting around this alleged difficulty?
6. Enumerate and briefly identify (a) the reasons for believing that
the damages caused by World War II would be quickly made good
and (b) the reasons for skepticism.

Contemporary Issues

postwar foreign economic
policy has proceeded along two lines. One line has involved participation in certain international organizations, notably the United
Nations; the other has been the result of exclusively American initiatives. We shall discuss first our efforts to promote our national
economic interests through certain intergovernmental organizations connected with the United Nations: the International
Monetary Fund, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Labor Office, and the proposed International Trade Organization.
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
During the war international trade was carried on largely on
government account with little regard to price or profit considerations. At war's end varying degrees of inflation had broken down
even the loose price relationships that had survived the managed
currency regimes of the 1930s. No common denominator permitted
international price comparisons. Until a new one could be developed, international trade had to proceed on the cumbersome and
unsatisfactory basis of bilateral barter agreements.
The International Monetary Fund * is designed to provide the
nations with a common international medium of exchange. It is a
multigovernment financial organization with ownership vested in
the member governments. National subscriptions, or quotas, and
voting rights are determined roughly by the volume and value of
1
The plans for the Fund were worked out during the war by monetary technicians
from a number of the countries which were engaged in the struggle against Germany
and Japan. It was not, however, until the Spring of 1947 that it began to operate. The
seat of the Fund is in Washington.

558

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

559

a country's international trade. The quotas of the 49 countries
which were members of the Fund on April 15, 1951, amounted to
approximately $8 billions and ranged in size from our $2,750,000,000 to Liberia's and Panamas $500,000.
The assets of the Fund. The assets of the Fund consist of
member subscriptions plus retained earnings. Subscriptions are payable 25 percent in gold (or in United States dollars) and 75 percent
in the currencies of the member governments. Since these national
currencies are simply noninterest-bearing debts, the negotiable assets in the Fund consist of gold and of such of the national currencies as are generally acceptable in international trade.
The purpose of the Fund. Membership in the Fund provides
every member with a limited line of credit available to meet temporary deficits in its balance of payments on current account. A
country's quota determines its maximum line of credit. Not more
than 25 percent of this maximum may be borrowed in any one year.
The quota of $1,200,000,000 reserved for Russia opened up a line
of credit totaling $1,500,000,000.2
The purpose of the line of credit is to give a country a breathing
spell during which corrections may automatically emerge or domestic policies may be adopted which will eliminate the deficit on
current account without the need of exchange controls or tariff
increases. After a transition period, continuation of controls for
this purpose requires Fund consent. There is no similar time limit
on the right of countries to maintain exchange controls to eliminate
deficits in balances of payments on capital account.
To prevent the undue use of its resources the Fund levies graduated service charges, payable in gold, and varying directly with
the amount and the duration of the borrowing. Furthermore, a
country is required to reduce its line of credit (i.e., repurchase its
currency from the Fund) whenever an improvement in its balance
2
The method of calculating this Russian line of credit is as follows: Prior to borrowing, the Russian quota consisted of $300,000,000 to be paid in gold and $900,000,000 in
paper rubles. Russia was entitled to sell additional paper rubles to the Fund and to take
in exchange currencies needed to meet her foreign exchange obligations until the Fund's
holding of rubles reached $2,400,000,000. $1,500,000,000 is the difference between
$2,400,000,000 and the $900,000,000 paid in in paper rubles.
The Russian government insisted upon and secured a quota in excess of what it was
entitled to under the formula used for determining quotas. It was thought at the time
that the Russian demand was motivated in part by prestige considerations, and in part
by a desire to obtain a large and relatively inexpensive line of credit. For reasons that
will be suggested later, the Russian government never accepted membership in the
Fund. Nevertheless her quota is cited here to show how much help the Fund can extend
to a country faced with a temporary deficit in its balance of payments on current account.

560

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

of payments puts it in possession of gold, dollars, or other generally convertible currencies. This provision is to prevent a country
from using the Fund to finance long-term capital developments or
to build up unnecessarily large gold or foreign exchange holdings
outside the Fund.
The Fund and the gold standard. The fact that quotas are payable partly in gold and partly in local paper currencies requires that
each member define its national money in terms of gold or, what
comes to the same thing, in terms of United States dollars "of the
weight and fineness in effect on July 1, 1941."
Since the foreign exchanges were in a chaotic condition at the
time the Articles of Agreement were being drafted (July, 1944) it
was provided that each original member country would accept as
its initial parity the rate of exchange prevailing on the sixtieth day
preceding the entry into force of the Fund Agreement. In the event
that this rate was not satisfactory,3 it could be altered within 30 days
at the request of either the member or the Fund. The new rate,
unlike the original one, required Fund approval, failing which any
member would "be deemed to have withdrawn from the Fund."
After a transition period of five years, members would be required to protect these parities by allowing gold exports and imports whenever demand and supply conditions in the foreign
exchange markets drove the prices of their currencies a little above
or a little below their official parities. The Fund was to set these
limits which would thus correspond with the gold export and import
points of the traditional gold standard. On the surface, therefore,
the Fund seemed designed to facilitate the return to the old international gold standard.
This was a surprising development in view of the widespread
conviction that the gold standard had been responsible for The
Great Depression, and that a return to it would deprive governments of the power to carry through domestic full-employment programs. What is the explanation?
The escape clauses. The explanation is probably to be found in
the two exceptions to the gold standard rules which were to be
permitted when countries were confronted with a fundamental disequilibrium in their balances of payments, preventing them from
securing an adequate supply of scarce currencies.
(1) A fundamental disequilibrium. Under the Articles of Agreement a member may alter its initial parity by not more than 10
3
The problem here was the determination of new purchasing power parities. See pp.
351-2.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

561

percent without consent of the Fund. Changes in excess of 10
percent are permitted when necessary to correct a fundamental disequilibrium. The Fund may not base an objection on the domestic
and social policies of the petitioning government. But if the Fund
objects on other grounds, and its objection is disregarded, the government involved may be required to withdraw from the Fund.
The term fundamental disequilibrium is not defined in the Articles. Apparently a country is to be regarded as confronted with
such a disequilibrium if (a) its price level is so high relative to
foreign price levels that the people find it advantageous to buy
abroad more than they can pay for through exports and foreign
loans, and (b) the correction involves either (i) deflationary measures which the party in power believes would lead to its overthrow or (ii) the imposition of additional restrictions on imports
which the Fund believes would be more damaging to international
trade than the proposed devaluation.
(2) The "scarce-currency" concept. Still more significant is the
escape provided through the "scarce-currency" concept. Scarce
currencies are due, of course, to the existence of fundamental dis~
equilibria. One group of countries cannot have chronic deficits in
their balances of payments (the earmark of a fundamental disequilibrium) unless another group of countries has chronic surpluses. The deficits occur because the people in the deficit
countries want more of the money of the surplus countries than
they can buy at the official parities. Under the terms of the Agreement they cannot bid the prices of these moneys above their parities. Hence the moneys necessarily become scarce.
The term is not defined, but it is evident from the context that
the currency of a country will be scarce if (a) the domestic price
level is so low relative to foreign price levels that the people find
it profitable to sell abroad more than they find it advantageous to
buy from abroad, and more than they are willing to finance by
voluntary foreign investments or by gifts, and (b) the correction
of the situation requires either (i) a deliberately induced rise in the
domestic price level or (ii) a reduction of existing restrictions on
imports which the party in power believes would lead to its overthrow.
The concepts compared. The two concepts obviously represent
two sides of the same coin. It is to be noted, however, that escape
from a "scarce currency" position involves primarily internal resource readjustments while the correction of a "fundamental disequilibrium" requires both internal resource readjustments and real

562

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

but unavoidable sacrifices. Only by importing less or by producing
more and exporting more can the situation be corrected. Deflation
was the accepted method of escape under the gold standard rules
of the 19th century. Devaluation and/or additional restrictions on
imports are not alternatives to sacrifices. On the contrary, they are
almost certain to increase them. The technicians who drafted the
Fund Agreement knew that this was so, but they apparently believed that, if membership in the Fund made devaluation impossible, governments would reject the deflationary escape route in
favor of quantitative restrictions on imports which would do more
harm to international economic relations than moderate and controlled devaluation. The fundamental disequilibrium concept is designed to provide governments with a politically acceptable method
of imposing sacrifices.
No comparable sacrifice is required of a scarce-currency country. All that it needs to do is to stop protecting its relatively inefficient firms and allow its efficient firms to expand.4 This involves
temporary hardships, but even while the transfer is being made
there is a net gain for the people as a whole.
The purpose of the scarce-currency clause. The scarce-currency
clause is a device for forcing a mature creditor country to increase
its imports or its. foreign lending or its foreign gifts or face discriminatory treatment of its exports. The clause thus provides an
escape from the "most-favored-nation treatment" pledges to which
Fund members are committed. It is argued that this type of discriminatory boycott will do less damage to international trade than
would a general and nondiscriminatory increase in trade barriers.
Thus if country A uses exchange controls or additional tariff duties
4

This is an oversimplification. The statement is true only if the government of a
country which is confronted with an alleged fundamental disequilibrium is also willing
to permit a shift of resources into those lines of production in which it possesses a comparative advantage, and allow a portion of the resulting output to be exported. At the
present writing some governments which complain most vociferously about their fundamental disequilibrium situations deliberately prevent this internal rearrangement of resources and at the same time refuse to create the domestic conditions which might
attract foreign private capital and know-how. In such cases the measures which a scarcecurrency country is expected to take cannot correct the disequilibrium. When a government acts this way and at the same time alleges that it is confronted with a fundamental
disequilibrium, it is in effect claiming that the productivity of its economy is not sufficient
to support the level of living its people are entitled to, and that its more wealthy neighbors have a moral obligation to continue to provide them gratuitously with the goods
and services needed to maintain this level of living. This attitude is an expression of a
definitely anti-capitalistic way of thinking. It is an "ideology," and both the Fund and
the Bank are specifically prohibited by their statutes from denying credit to countries
solely on ideological grounds. As will appear presently both of these international credit
institutions appear to have promoted this unworkable illusion.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

563

to cut imports from country B by 20 percent, because of lack of
B's currency, the principle of nondiscrimination requires that it
subject imports from countries C, D, E, etc., to the same treatment,
despite the fact that its sales to these countries have put it in possession of sufficient of their currencies to enable it to buy as much
as before.
Once the Fund declares that the currency of a particular country is scarce, this nondiscrimination requirement ceases to hold.
Members may impose exchange controls with respect to that currency, or discriminatory import quotas, with a view to limiting imports to what can be paid for with the scarce currency at hand,
without the necessity of imposing any restrictions on their imports
from other countries. The clause thus legalizes a collective boycott.
Foreign fears regarding the United States. These two exceptions
to the gold standard rules are an expression of a fear widely held
abroad regarding the risk of a too intimate tie-up with the United
States. Perhaps the best way to make clear the nature of this fear
is to put it in the form of an imaginary discourse by one of the
foreign experts at Bretton Woods where the Articles of Agreement
were drawn up.
"Europe and much of Asia are a shambles. The destruction of
life and property has been enormous. Without American help the
kind of civilization you believe in and we believe in may disappear,
never to return. The situation of some of us is particularly serious
not only because of the material destruction wrought by the war,
but because we have had to sell foreign investments accumulated
over many years. The income from these investments is no longer
available to help us earn our way in the world. Most of the old
creditor countries of Europe are now debtor countries. They must
export or die. The greatest single contribution the United States
can make to world recovery is to open up its market to our products
so that we may earn the dollars with which to buy the many things
essential to our early recovery, and which only you are in a position
to furnish.
"We are grateful for the unparalleled generosity of your lendlease program and for your willingness to shoulder the lion's share
of the assistance that is even now going out through UNRRA. All
that you have asked in return is that we commit ourselves after the
war to eliminate discriminatory treatment in international commerce and to reduce tariffs and other trade barriers. Our governments have given you this assurance. You cannot, however, expect
us to accord you most-favored-nation treatment in our small mar-

564

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

kets unless you conduct yourself as befits your position as the world's
mightiest industrial power.
"The reductions in your tariffs made during the 1930s are
encouraging, but the administration of your customs is costly, timeconsuming, arbitrary and uncertain, and the duties on many products which interest us are still much too high. Nor can we be sure
that recent concessions will be continued. The fact that you do not
discriminate against us, that you treat us all equally badly, does not
enable us to earn the dollars to buy the many things we shall need
for our reconstruction.
"Nonetheless we have been sufficiently heartened by your generosity and by the evidence that the protectionist spirit in your
country is on the retreat to be willing, despite our serious reservations regarding the workability of the gold standard, to join with you
in an attempt to restore it. But we must insist upon escape clauses.
The fundamental-disequilibrium and the scarce-currency concepts
provide these escapes, which we shall invoke, if, contrary to our
hopes, you do not go much further with your tariff reductions.
"But even if you open your market to our products and invest a
reasonable proportion of your annual savings abroad, we cannot
bind ourselves to maintain indefinitely fixed parities with your
money. The temper of our peoples is such that we shall probably
not be able to keep pace with you in the introduction of technological improvements. Technological change involves short-run
personal insecurity. Rightly or wrongly, our people put a higher
value on security and a lower value on progress than do your people. Under a rigid and unconditional gold standard we would have
to accept a steady decline in our monetary incomes as the price
of doing business with you. Our governments could not bring this
to pass even if they wanted to.
"We believe that the concept of a fundamental disequilibrium
provides us with a way out of that particular difficulty. Through
controlled and periodical devaluations we shall keep our prices
competitive in terms of dollars without imposing on our governments the impossible task of getting our workers—for they are the
main stumbling block—to accept periodic reductions in their money
wages.
"Periodic devaluations, however, provide us with no assurance
that we shall be able to enter your protected market, or that we
shall be able to avoid being drawn into the periodic slumps which
we regard as the inevitable price you have to pay for your youthful
enthusiasm for progress. So we warn you that when your willing-

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

565

ness to buy from us, or lend to us, or to give to us deprives us of
the dollars with which to buy from you, we shall invoke the scarcecurrency clause against you. We do not think that our position
is unreasonable, because we know, as do you, that all you have to
do to prevent us from "ganging up" on you is to open wide your
market, as Britain did 100 years ago, when it became the world's
greatest industrial power and the world's greatest investor. Just as
free trade in Britain inaugurated a period of unparalleled peace
and prosperity, for Britain and the world, so now free trade in the
United States may bring similar blessings far more rapidly than any
of us here even dare hope."
The Fund: an appraisal. What is to be said for this ingenious
scheme? Can it reconcile the conflicting domestic policies of national governments and enable them to gain the great material advantages that specialization and international trade make possible?
To date the Fund has scored few successes. Governments have
devalued their currencies by much more than 10 percent without
always waiting for Fund approval. They have continued and even
increased their use of the quantitative restrictions which they were
supposed to give up, and the Fund has not seen fit to use its disciplinary powers against them. Indeed its insistence on short-run
foreign exchange rate stability has forced countries that are committed to inflationary domestic full-employment programs to continue to use the quantitative import restrictions which were to be
abolished with the assistance of the Fund. Such withdrawals as
have occurred were not due to Fund initiative. Nor has our own
foreign aid program been determined by a desire to avoid the
"scarce-currency" sanctions.
This record does not necessarily discredit the Fund. It was not
designed for the kind of times in which we have been living. Its
authors planned it on the assumption that Russia, Britain, and the
United States would cooperate in world reconstruction. Given their
assumptions, could the Fund accomplish any considerable part of
the things its proponents expected? It seems doubtful.
First and foremost, the Fund machinery requires that member
governments allow the price mechanism to operate. This does not
mean that traditional import and export duties, if moderate and
stable over time, are inconsistent with the operating requirements
of the Fund, or that governments may not alter the original distribution of money incomes by their taxing and spending policies.
These interventions work through prices, and individuals will take
account of them in making their decisions. But it does mean that

566

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

governments which refuse to allow prices to allocate resources cannot accept even the mild restrictions on their freedom of action
which membership in the Fund involves.
It follows that Russia and her satellites could not be in the Fund,
even though they were willing to provide all of the information
which membership requires. The Communist type of physical planning would be impossible if the Russian people were free to buy in
the cheapest markets and if the managers of State plants were free
to sell in the dearest markets. Under physical planning, prices are
not accurate reflections of consumer preferences, and hence it is
technically impossible to fix on rates of exchange which represent
purchasing power parities. The foreign exchanges must be controlled because their control constitutes a vital part of the entire
planning mechanism.
Nor could Britain under the Labour government—nor indeed
any country which makes extensive use of price controls—accept
the Fund rules of international behavior. When prices are not allowed to equalize supply and demand and allocate resources as
between the domestic and export sectors of the economy, there
must be rationing and resource allocation. Price controls, rationing,
and resource allocations require the exchange controls and quantitative restrictions on imports and exports that were to be eliminated with the help of the Fund's resources.
If these conclusions are correct, why did teams of eminent
economists spend so much time and effort working out the complicated arrangements just described? A possible explanation is that
the experts, who were almost all of Keynesian persuasion (with
Lord Keynes playing a leading role in their discussion), envisaged
a postwar world in which all governments, regardless of their ideological labels, would adopt the Keynesian techniques for maintaining full employment and for securing whatever personal distribution
of incomes the dominant forces in their countries regarded as just.
Indeed, the United Nations' Charter requires that member governments accept responsibility for maintaining full employment. They
were convinced that the Fund rules were not only consistent with
the Keynesian techniques but essential to its operation internationally.
The Keynesian technique, it will be recalled, rejects in principle
price controls, rationing, resource allocations, labor regimentation,
and all the other paraphernalia of physical planning. Prices are to
be allowed to perform their normal directive functions while the
State uses its taxing, spending, and borrowing powers to get pur-

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

567

chasing power into the hands of the people in such amounts and
in such proportions as to secure full employment, social justice, and
the sense of security and freedom which, it is held, can exist only
when men know that there are necessary and remunerative jobs for
all.
The problem, as the experts appear to have seen it, was this: how
can governments pursue independent and divergent price level policies without the need of insulating their markets from the impact
of competitive forces originating abroad? Some governments, for
example, will restrict the supply of money with a view to allowing
the fruits of technological progress to be passed on in the form of
lower prices; others will aim at long-run price stability, with the
gains of progress going to factor owners (in capitalistic societies) or
to the citizens (in noncapitalistic societies) in the form of higher
money incomes; and still others will find that it is easier to maintain full employment if they allow the general price level to rise
and let the gains of increased productivity be reflected in a still
greater rise in money incomes.
Under the old international gold standard, governments could
not control their domestic price levels. International competition
forced them to march in lockstep. If any one important country
pursued a deflationary price policy, all the others were forced to
follow suit even though this caused some unemployment. Nonetheless some common monetary denominator was needed, and, since
gold enjoyed universal popular acceptance, the logical thing to do
was to define all national currencies in terms of this commodity,
but to reserve, to any country which elected to operate its economy
with a more rapidly rising price level than its trading partners, the
right to devalue its currency periodically so as to keep its prices
competitive in foreign markets.
If it is correct that the main purpose of the International Monetary Fund is to harmonize national full-employment programs in
accordance with the policy recommendations which Keynesians derive from the theory of effective demand, then the usefulness of
the Fund would appear to depend (a) on the validity of the policy
recommendations which derive from the theory of effective demand, (b) upon the willingness of socialistic and communistic societies to abandon the use of physical controls, and (c) upon the
workability of the Fund mechanism in a Keynesian world.
In Chapter 29 we indicated our objections to the policy recommendations derived from the theory of effective demand. In Chapter 44 we shall describe the kind of socialism the experts appeared

568

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

to have had in mind and show why, in our judgment, there is little
prospect that convinced socialists, with their strong attachment to
the principle of equality, would, or could, abandon physical planning.
But, accepting for the moment the workability of the Keynesian
policy prescriptions at the national level, and assuming for the sake
of the argument that socialists would substitute financial planning
for physical planning, does it follow that the Fund mechanism
could resolve the international conflicts that have hitherto plagued
national planning? We believe that it cannot.
The mechanism is not flexible enough. It is simply not possible
for an international agency to consider requests for authority to
devalue or appreciate the currencies of countries that are committed to maintain full employment at any cost and reach decisions with the required frequency, speed, and secrecy. If it
becomes known that a country is even contemplating a change
in the official parity of its currency, speculation for the fall or the
rise sets in immediately. If a devaluation is in prospect, a country
can be denuded of its gold and foreign exchange holdings in a
matter of days. This being so, the orderly, time-consuming, and
necessarily public procedures for altering exchange rates required
by the Fund are out of place. For countries committed to financial
planning for full employment it is not possible to return to even
the qualified gold standard of the International Monetary Fund.
As long as they maintain the official parities, they are forced to
maintain exchange controls for transactions on current account as
well as on capital account. For such countries, and for their trading partners as well, the best solution is to establish convertible
but freely fluctuating exchanges which will accurately reflect shortrun shifts in the supply of and demand for foreign exchange. Countries that want to use free domestic market prices as directives
without submitting those prices to the disciplines of the international
gold standard must accept the losses as well as the gains of fluctuating exchange rates or, if they define their moneys in terms of
gold, their exchange rates with other countries soon become highly
unrealistic. They must either abandon gold or defend these unrealistic rates through domestic price controls, exchange rationing,
import and export quotas, and all the other paraphernalia of physical planning.
If these conclusions are correct, it would appear that the International Monetary Fund reduces rather than increases the prospects

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

569

that the nations will return to competitive capitalism. It encourages
the illusion that national planning and international specialization
on the basis of comparative advantage are compatible.
What then should be our conclusion? The economist as economist is not qualified to make the final decision. Political decisions
may justify the continued existence of the Fund. Given the exaggerated nationalism present in most countries and the wide-spread
fear of "Colonial Exploitation" in many of the very poor countries,
it is arguable that the Fund, as an international organization, could
play a constructive role through its ability to extend or withhold
credits and to authorize or disapprove changes in parities. But for
it to play such a role the Articles of Agreement will probably have
to be amended in a number of respects. This is not the place to
discuss possible amendments. All that can be said at this time is
that from a strictly economic point of view the Fund has not to
date been able to promote the kind of international behavior that
is needed if countries are to rely on market forces to integrate
their economies one with another.
THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION
AND DEVELOPMENT

The International Bank was created at the same time as the
Fund. It is a publicly owned multigovernment investment agency
authorized to issue common stock up to a total of $10 billion. The
amount of stock for which a government may subscribe is fixed in
the Articles of Agreement. The subscription quotas of the original
members are roughly the same as for the Fund, somewhat less for
the poorer ones, somewhat larger for the wealthier countries, since
a government's subscription involves a requirement to lend internationally. (Our subscription of $3,175 million is almost $500 million larger than our Fund quota.)
The Bank, like the Fund, is located in Washington. By the end
of 1953, 53 countries had taken up in full their subscription rights
to a total of just over $9 billions.5
Organization. The Bank is organized like a private corporation.
Each country appoints a Governor who casts as many votes as his
government owns shares in the organization. The effective direction is in the hands of a small Executive Committee and a President
and Staff.
5
Russia and most of her satellites are not members. Czechoslovakia is still technically
a member but has not completed payment of its subscription.

570

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

The governments representing the five largest stockholders are automatically Members of the Executive Committee. The others are elected
by the Governors of the remaining countries, and cast votes in proportion to the number of shares of stock held by the countries they represent.
Purpose. The principal purpose of the Bank is to promote international investments for the reconstruction of the countries damaged by the last war and for general developmental purposes, with
particular consideration for the needs of the so-called "underdeveloped countries." Secondary purposes are the promotion of the longrange growth of international trade, the maintenance of equilibrium
in national balances of payments, and the raising of the productivity, standards of living, and conditions of labor in the borrowing
countries. Loans are not to be made simply for the purpose of
helping countries balance their payments on current account. This
is tne responsibility of the International Monetary Fund.
The Bank's lending capacity. The maximum which the Bank may
lend may not exceed its unimpaired subscribed capital, plus its
earned reserves and surplus. Actually its ability to lend is likely
to be limited for some time to come to (a) the proportion of its
paid-up capital which member governments are required to lend
by the Articles of Agreement or are willing to make available, and
(b) the amount which the Bank can borrow in the private money
markets of its members.
Each government is required to pay 2 percent of its subscription
in gold or in United States dollars and 18 percent in its own currency. The remaining 80 percent is only callable to make good the
failures by borrowers. This balance is thus in the nature of a reserve guaranty fund. Consequently the Bank's direct lending power
is limited to its 2 percents paid in gold and to so much of the 18
percents as member governments agree to release. The United
States is the only country which to date has agreed to release its
18 percent in full. Thus the Bank may make dollar loans out of its
own resources up to 20 percent of our subscription ($635 million)
plus all of the 2 percents, and smaller nondollar loans in such local
currencies as are convertible and available for international investment purposes.
The Bank's indirect lending power depends upon the confidence
which private investors place upon the reserve guaranty fund
(which for the most part consists of legal claims on the inconvertible currencies of member governments) and upon the economic
soundness of the Bank's loans.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

571

All loans are guaranteed. The Bank may loan to governments,
to their political subdivisions, to public corporations, and to private
firms. In all cases the central government of the country involved
must guarantee the loan both as to principal and interest. Until the
currencies of more countries become freely convertible, the ability
of the Bank to sell its bonds will depend primarily on our 20 percent and upon the soundness of the securities in its investment
portfolio. If the debtors honor their obligations punctually and in
full, the Bank will be in possession of a modest revolving fund for
fresh lending. It seems unlikely, however, that its loans will approach the $9000 million figure which represents the present paid-in
capital as long as most currencies are inconvertible.6
The cost of borrowing. The Bank's service charge (interest plus
commissions) is fixed slightly above the rate at which it is able to
borrow money. The charge is intended to meet its own expenses,
including the cost of borrowing, and a reasonable reserve against
bad debts.
The criteria for lending. The loans are for specific purposes for
which funds cannot be had on "reasonable" terms through ordinary
commercial channels. This "reasonable" test makes it inevitable
that the demand for loans will exceed the supply of loanable funds.
Hence the Bank is required to determine the relative needs of the
borrowing countries and to satisfy itself that the specific projects
for which it agrees to supply funds are more important than any
others which might be proposed. The Bank is expected to take
account of the total foreign borrowings, private and public, of the
countries with which it does business, the uses to which all borrowed funds are put, the domestic policies of the borrowing and
lending countries, and, most difficult of all, the relative importance
of all of the proposals before it. The physical productivity of a
proposed project is not enough. Evidence is required that the
project when completed will either reduce the borrowing country's
need for imports or increase its exports sufficiently to provide the
foreign exchange required to service the loan. It is obvious that
the decision to eliminate the interest rate as a rationing device requires an extraordinary degree of competence on the part of the
individuals who have to make the final decisions. Political considerations cannot be entirely eliminated. The Bank may not, how6
At the end of August, 1952, the Bank had made loans of just under $1,500 million
to 27 countries and had successfully sold some $500 million or its own bonds, primarily
in the American money market, but with small issues sold in the Swiss, Canadian and
British markets.

572

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

ever, reject a loan for purely political or noneconornic reasons. This
proviso was introduced into the Articles of Agreement to make sure
that countries which were unwilling to create conditions that would
attract foreign private capital directly would not thereby be prevented from securing it indirectly and on more favorable terms
through the International Bank.
The usefulness of the Bank. Given the virulent nationalism presently prevailing in the relatively underdeveloped countries, and
their fear of "economic imperialism," the resumption of international investment has proved very difficult. The Bank can help
overcome this psychological barrier. Being a multigovernment institution, with the vast majority of its Governors representing the
poorer borrowing countries, it can insist upon standards which
would be unacceptable if laid down in a direct government-to-government loan or in a private loan. To date the Bank's investment
decisions have met with general approval in American foreign investment circles and it has had no difficulty raising the funds
needed to finance every venture which the Executive Committee
and the staff have regarded as economically sound.
The real test of the Bank's usefulness will come when its outstanding bond issues pass the mark which represents the limit of
the guarantee offered by the gold 2 percents and the 18 percent
in American currency to which we are committed. In effect the
Bank's bond sales to date have had the credit of the United States
behind them. Beyond that point, they will have to depend much
more on the public appraisal of the projects themselves.
This new situation may strengthen the position of the Bank. It
will be forced to say to would-be borrowers that its ability to help
depends upon its ability to sell its bonds to private investors on
their merits and that this, in turn, will depend on its ability to convince private investors of the economic soundness of the projects
which it finances.
The Bank and private enterprise. Those who believe in the superiority of privately managed over publicly managed business are
somewhat concerned lest the Bank unduly encourage public ownership in the borrowing countries. The requirement that the government of the borrowing country guarantee all loans necessarily gives
public agencies a preferred status as borrowers. Private enterprises
which need foreign capital hesitate to ask for a public guarantee
because of the public control which always goes with such guarantees. It is not surprising, therefore, that almost all of the Bank's
loans to date have gone to developments to be carried out under

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

573

public auspices. Moreover, the Bank may not, as has already been
noted, reject a loan application purely and simply on the basis of an
ideological preference for private enterprise.
In an effort to get around this pronounced bias in favor of public
enterprise the Bank is now studying a proposal to establish an International Finance Corporation as an affiliate. The member governments would provide the initial capital, but the Corporation's
investments, which, it is hoped, would be more in equities in private
enterprises and less in bonds of public agencies, would not enjoy
any government guarantees.
It remains to be seen whether this is a practical proposal. Quite
aside from the public-versus-private enterprise aspect of the issue,
it would certainly be desirable to see more of the international flow
of capital take the form of equity investment, since this form of
investment reduces the strain on a borrowing country's balance of
payments in periods of poor business.
But the Bank, with or without this affiliate, cannot bring about
any large resumption of international capital movements unless the
borrowing countries (1) possess an entrepreneurial class capable of
discovering and exploiting domestic investment opportunities; (2)
are prepared to create domestic conditions which make it worth
while for their own citizens with surplus funds to keep their capital
at home; and (3) are willing to allow their economies to be integrated with other economies on the basis of comparative advantage.
Foreign capital will always be hesitant about going into a country
on the basis of special privileges which are denied to private domestic capital. A country which can keep its own capital at home only
by drastic penalties is generally regarded as a bad investment risk
by foreign capitalists. Finally a country which uses foreign capital
to develop activities that cannot meet the test of international competition will also prove a bad risk.
As the President of the International Bank pointed out at the
sixth annual meeting of the Board of Governors:
Foreign capital cannot be broadly effective in the absence of local
capital. Foreign advice will be useless unless there are roots for it to
nourish.
At best, outside capital can provide only a margin over and above what
a people are doing for themselves. It can be the margin between failure
and success, but only when there is a substantial local effort. And there
can be such an effort only when a nation has a will to develop—when
there is a drive within the country itself to improve the living standards
of its people, and a government which reflects that drive.

574

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

If governments are encouraged by the existence of the Bank to
refuse to create a favorable domestic investment environment, then
the International Bank in the long run may reduce rather than
increase the international movements of capital it was designed to
promote.
Questions:
1.

Discuss the International Monetary Fund under the following headings:
(a) qualifications for membership,
(b) assets of the Fund,
(c) the purpose of the Fund,
(d) comparison of the methods of adjusting to balance of payments
difficulties under the Fund and under the old international gold
standard, and
(e) the reasons for the relaxation of the rules of the international
gold standard.

2.

Under appropriate circumstances, the Fund's Articles of Agreement
permit countries to discriminate against imports from countries
whose currencies have been declared to be "scarce," i.e., to depart
from the most-favored-nation treatment required in principle of all
Fund members.
(a) Explain what is meant by "most-favored-nation treatment."
(b) Identify the circumstances under which a country's currency
may be declared "scarce."
(c) Explain the argument in support of the thesis that discrimination is less harmful to international trade than a general nondiscriminatory increase in tariff barriers by countries confronted with a
fundamental disequilibrium.

3. "Countries committed to the physical planning of production and
distribution through price controls and countries committed to financial planning for full production cannot accept even the qualified
gold standard rules of the International Monetary Fund."
(a) What is the difference between the two types of planning referred to in the preceding statement?
(b) Explain the reasoning behind the statement, and, if you disagree, defend your position.
4.

Distinguish between (a) the purposes of the Bank and the Fund;
(b) the legal limit to the Bank's ability to lend and the practical
limit.

5.

Explain the reasons for and discuss the wisdom of the provision that

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES

575

the Bank may not reject a loan application "for purely political or
noneconomic reasons."
6. It has been charged that the Bank unduly encourages public ownership in the borrowing countries. What is the basis for this charge?
7. What conditions in the so-called underdeveloped countries must the
International Bank promote if its loans are to increase the grand

total of international lending?

40
Contemporary Issues (Conta)

THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION
A HE International Labour Organization (ILO) was established as part of the League of Nations'
system and is the only part that survived the League. It is now
affiliated with the United Nations.
ILO objectives and organization. The declared purpose of the ILO
is to raise labor standards, particularly in industrially underdeveloped countries, and to protect standards in the industrially advanced countries. It operates through annual conferences composed
of representatives of organized labor, organized business management, and government delegates. Each country is represented by
a single spokesman for all labor, a single spokesman for all business,
and two citizens, who may or may not be permanent civil servants,
who act as spokesmen for the national interests and the wider interests of consumers generally. A permanent Secretariat assembles the
facts regarding working conditions throughout the world, considers
ways and means of improving labor standards and regularizing employment, and formulates recommendations and draft conventions
for consideration by the annual conferences. After approval these
documents are transmitted to the member governments for appropriate action. The recommendations, in general, represent aspirations; the conventions aim at reforms believed capable of
immediate adoption and enforcement by member governments.
The conventions take the form of detailed draft treaties which
must be submitted by member governments to their appropriate
legislative bodies within one year after their adoption by the ILO
Conference. In the case of the United States the appropriate legislative body is the United States Senate. If it ratifies an ILO con576

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES (CONT/'D)

577

vention by a two-thirds majority, the provisions of the convention
become the supreme law of the land and, as some think, superior
even to the Constitution itself.1
It was the hope of the supporters of the ILO that the enormous
variations in labor standards in different parts of the world could
be narrowed as a result of the publicity, advice, and pressure generated by this new international organization. The plane of international competition was to be elevated and humanized. Since the
threat to labor standards in the industrially advanced countries was
thought to come from goods imported from the industrially underdeveloped countries, the conferences quite naturally concerned
themselves primarily with labor standards in the export industries of
the several member countries. It is held that the leveling up of
1
Many of the Conventions which our delegations have assisted in passing (usually,
with our government representatives casting the decisive votes within the American
delegation) require action by the federal government which is beyond its constitutional
powers, as presently interpreted. The possibility of circumventing the cumbersome and
time-consuming procedures of constitutional amendment by the simpler treaty process
has aroused considerable misgivings in the minds of those who attach importance to our
federal form of government. To safeguard against this possibility some 60 Senators
recently signed their names to a Joint Resolution which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary (February, 1952). It called for an amendment (the so-called Bricker
amendment) to the Constitution which would, among other things, require that any
treaty which altered or abridged the laws of the United States, or the Constitution or
laws of the several states, would have to be passed by both houses. (S.J. Res. 130, 82nd
Cong., 2d Sess.) A few months later the author of this Joint Resolution submitted a
Concurrent Resolution which read in part as follows: "Whereas the delegates appointed
to represent the Government of the United States at conferences of the International
Labor Organization have from time to time voted for the adoption of conventions
which may prejudice the Federal-State character of our constitutional Government; . . . .
Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives concurring),
that it is the sense of the Congress that . . . such delegates should not vote in favor of
any proposal—whether in the form of recommendations or conventions (1) which may
prejudice the Federal-State character of our constitutional government, or (2) which
are incompatible with our basic constitutional principles . . ." (S.Con. Res. 83, 82d
Cong., 2d Sess.)
On June 4th, 1953 the Senate Judiciary Committee recommended to the Senate for
adoption a revision of the earlier Joint Resolution which reads as follows:
"Section 1. A provision of a treaty which conflicts with this Constitution shall not
be of any force or effect.
"Section 2. A treaty shall become effective as internal law in the United States only
through legislation which would be valid in the absence of treaty.
"Section 3. Congress shall have power to regulate all executive and other agreements
with any foreign power or international organization. All such agreements shall be subject to the limitations imposed on treaties by this article."
A detailed account of the constitutional issue favorable to the Bricker amendment is
to be found in Felix Morley's Treaty Law and the Constitution, No. 448 in the series
"National Economic Problems," The American Enterprise Association, New York: 1953.
For a persuasive statement of the case against the Bricker amendment, see the Brief
of the Bar of the City of New York (The Record of the Association of the Bar of the
City of New York, Vol. B, No. 4, April 1953).

578

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

standards will take the sting out of international competition, foster
international trade, and make of it an instrument of peace instead
of war. Particular reliance is placed upon organized labor in lowwage countries to bring their governments into line and to enforce
any agreements that may be reached. The ILO accordingly endorses and actively promotes trade unionism everywhere as a great
democratic institution. The method of representation presupposes
the formation in each country of a single central labor organization
and of a comparable association of a nation's businesses.
The ILO has made protectionism respectable. This sounds like
an admirable program, but are the means appropriate and were the
motives of the original sponsors equally admirable?
Mr. Gompers, the then head of the American Federation of Labor,
for example, is on record as saying that his British conferees secured
his and the Federation's endorsement of the ILO idea by convincing him that American labor had much to gain if the governments
pf underdeveloped countries could be induced to raise labor standards in their export industries. In a symposium on the ILO held at
the University of Virginia in 1935, a permanent member of the organization's staff stated that the fiat narrowing of labor standards
would enable high-wage countries to dispense with high tariffs.2
British and American and Western European labor generally favored the ILO because they saw in it a device to protect their own
standards. It provided a morally approved substitute for the tariffs
which enlightened people everywhere had come to recognize as
threats to the peace.
Actually there is no reason why the Organization should be so
concerned with labor standards in the export industries of the backward countries. In general these are the most efficient industries
with labor standards substantially higher than those prevailing in
the bulk of the primitive and domestically oriented industries. The
people in underdeveloped countries must rely on the ability of these
industries if they are to secure adequate supplies of foreign capital
and technical know-how. Moreover, the prices of these products
must be low if they are to be within the reach of the masses of the
people in the underdeveloped countries.
Its means defeat its ends. If our concern is with the common man
in India, China, South America, and other industrially underdeveloped countries, have we any moral right to impose upon their export
industries wages higher than an efficiency minimum? The efficiency
2
James T. Shotwell, Editor, The Origins of the International Labor Organization,
Columbia Univ. Press, New York: 1934.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

579

minimum wage will undoubtedly result, in many cases, in very substantial profits, but this is the price people in poor countries must
pay if they are to attract substantial amounts of foreign capital. If
the resulting profit margin offends the sense of equity of the people
in the underdeveloped countries—and the decision should rest with
them—and if, as may frequently be the case, where law and order
and the protection of property rights prevail, the margin is more
than sufficient to maintain a steady in-flow of foreign capital, the
government may very well tax away the excess. This excess can
provide funds for roads, education, public health, and other services
beneficial to the entire population. It can also provide a good deal
of the foreign exchange needed for industrial development. Used
in this fashion these funds will have a far more powerful leverage
effect on the national income and the nation's well being than if
they are diverted to a small and privileged group of workers in the
shape of wages higher than needed to staff the expanding modernized segment of the economy. Indeed, pending the development
through education of the tastes and preferences that are essential
if private enterprise is to flourish, such an increase in wages is more
likely to lead to increased absenteeism than to increased output per
man hour.3
No surer way of perpetuating poverty in underdeveloped countries can be imagined than to impose upon their export industries
labor standards high enough to protect the branches of these same
industries located in the advanced industrial countries. The sincerity of the concern of people in wealthy countries with the abject
poverty in many parts of the world can be tested by their readiness
to allow the modernized industries in underdeveloped countries to
take over an increasing share of the task of supplying the world with
the products of these industries.
This is the price which the people in "advanced" countries must
pay if they really want to improve conditions in less favored areas.
And the total price, as we have seen, is not heavy.
In the short run, admittedly, some people get hurt. But this is
no justification for blocking the only process by which poverty can
be relieved in large areas of the world. Men of good will may, however, very properly insist that the labor and capital in the exposed
industries should not be required to assume the entire burden of the
transitional suffering. Just as the governments of underdeveloped
countries may properly use the taxing power to diffuse the benefits
3
This is likely to happen in countries where standards and levels of living tend to
coincide. See discussion on p. 176.

580

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

of industrialization, so may the governments of industrially advanced countries use the taxing power to provide the funds needed
to indemnify, in part at least, the capital and to assist the labor in
the exposed industries to find new jobs. A comprehensive job-training and -placement service, together with unemployment compensation, can and should be made into powerful instruments for
keeping the labor market fluid and reducing the human costs involved.
But what have the people in the industrially developed countries
done? While protesting their concern with the deplorable conditions in backward countries they have passed restrictive immigration laws, raised tariffs, and then, by way of adding insult to
injury, they have called upon the governments of these countries to
impose on their industries, and particularly on their export industries, labor standards that reduce their ability to attract needed
capital. In effect they insist that the people in poor countries shall
eat their bread before they get the foreign flour (capital) with which
to bake it.
It is true that differences in national wage-paying capacity have
always received formal recognition in the ILO's proposals. But it
is also true that organized labor in the advanced countries would
very quickly have lost enthusiasm and the tepid interest of business
groups would have cooled if the Organization had recommended
the bare efficiency standards, which would minimize unit wage
costs. By definition such standards would increase the pressure on
competitive industries in the advanced countries. Hence the ILO
was obliged to aim higher than that, if it was to keep the support of
its influential friends; and it did.
The accomplishments of the ILO. To date the actual accomplishments of the ILO in the field of wages and hours have been slight.
The representatives of the poorer countries solemnly endorse the
recommendations and conventions coming out of the annual conferences, but their governments are careful not to saddle on their
export industries standards that would raise their costs and make
it impossible to sell in foreign markets. And our Senate has ratified
very few of the conventions endorsed by the American delegations
to the conferences.
Nonetheless, the ILO has provided a forum where representatives of labor and capital from many parts of the world oan meet
and discuss their common problems. Its technical committees have
given valuable counsels to the governments of many of the industrially underdeveloped countries. It has strengthened the hands

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

581

of labor leaders in countries where the threat of communism is
great. The real function of the ILO is educational. It would be
desirable, therefore, that the power of the Conference should be
limited to the making of recommendations, and that the recommendati6ns should have the support of a majority of each of the
three groups of delegates—employers, workers, and government—
rather than the two-thirds of the entire group of delegates as at
present.
THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE ORGANIZATION

In November 1945 the American Government, after consulation
with the British Government, issued a statement entitled Proposals
for Expansion of World Trade and Employment. In February 1946
the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations voted to
call an international conference on trade and employment with the
American proposals serving as the agenda for the conference. A
preparatory committee was appointed, and preliminary meetings of
experts were held in London in late 1946 and in Geneva in 1947.
Finally the full Conference met in Havana, Cuba, in 1948 and
brought forth the Havana Charter for an International Trade Organization.
The ITO Charter. Like the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, this charter attempts to reconcile the
trading policies of countries which are committed to varying
degrees of national planning. As in the case of the Fund the assumption is made that the political reasons for restricting world
trade will largely disappear if all countries will carry out successful
domestic full-employment programs.
Membership in the Organization gives the government of a country the right to raise objections to the policies of another country
when it believes that the interests of its own nationals have been
hurt; conversely, it is obliged to consider the protests of other members when a change in its policies, dictated by domestic considerations, adversely affects the interests of the nationals of these
members. Protectionists everywhere have been too prone to say
that the tariff is purely a domestic issue. This explicit recognition
of the fact that a nation's trade policy is a matter of international
concern is what makes the Charter significant.
The Charter is a long, complex, and extremely technical document. While it gives generous lip service to the need for stable
exchanges, convertible currencies, and moderate and stable tariffs
as prerequisites for bringing about a durable expansion of world

582

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

trade, it also recognizes that a country cannot pursue a resolute
full-employment program without the aid of a battery of devices
which can easily be used for protectionist purposes—higher tariffs,
quantitative restrictions on imports, exchange controls, etc. Consequently the Charter legalizes many devices dear to the hearts of
protectionists, provided only that the avowed purpose is to further
domestic development and full employment and not to protect the
home market.
The Charter never got out of the United States Senate Committee to which it was referred by the Administration. It now appears
unlikely that the ITO will ever become a going concern. Its death
in Committee appears to be due, on the one hand, to the excessive
fears of American protectionists that membership would force us
to adopt free trade, and, on the other, to the conviction of Americans favoring freer trade that the "escape clauses" in the Charter
actually rationalize and legalize old-fashioned protectionism and,
worse still, render it respectable. Evidence of the concealed protectionism in the Charter is found in Chapter II, Article 7, where it is
stated that member governments "recognize that unfair labour conditions, particularly in production for export, create difficulties in
international trade, and, accordingly each Member shall take whatever action shall be appropriate and feasible to eliminate such conditions within its territory." Here again we find this concern for
conditions in the precise sector of a nation's economy where there
is least need for concern.
THE GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS
AND TRADE (GATT)
Even before it became evident that the Senate would not ratify
the ITO Charter the Administration undertook to promote its main
objective of expanding world trade through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The General Agreement was drawn up by representatives of the
governments which participated in the second or Geneva session
of the United Nations Preparatory Committee for the U.N. Conference on Trade and Employment. The governments which ratified the Agreement are known as "Contracting Parties."
Procedures and accomplishments. Twenty-three countries ratified the Agreement at Geneva (1947), and there and then undertook (a) to make mutual reductions of tariffs, (b) to maintain low
duties or free entry where such treatment was already in effect, and
(c) to curb the use of quantitative restrictions on entry, through

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

583

quotas and exchange rationing, and preferential treatment of goods
originating in certain countries. Some 45,000 items, involving products which accounted for more than one-half of world trade in
1938, were affected by the network of bilateral agreements negotiated at Geneva. In general all the "Contracting Parties" accepted
the most-favored-nation principle and extended any concessions
granted in their negotiations with one party to all the others.
The constitutional authority for our participation in these negotiations rests upon the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act of 1934,
as amended and renewed from time to time.4 GATT is thus a device for speeding up the reduction of trade restrictions. In the 14
years, 1934-1947 inclusive, we negotiated 29 agreements through
the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act. At Geneva in the course of
a few weeks we negotiated 22, and we secured all of the concessions which these 22 made with one another.
Since Geneva, additional governments have ratified the Agreement and there have been frequent meetings of the Contracting
Parties—at Annecy, France, in 1948, at Torquay, England, in 1950,
and again at Geneva in 1952. As a result of the negotiations at
these meetings the United States has on paper become one of the
"Low Tariff" countries of the world. It can be shown, for example,
that the average burden placed on all goods (free and dutiable)
entering the U. S. after rising from 9.1 percent under the Underwood Tariff (1914-22) to 17.8 percent in 1931 under the HawleySmoot Tariff of 1930, had fallen to 5.6 percent by 1951 and that
the average burden placed on dutiable goods, after similarly rising
from 27 percent to a high of 53.2 percent, fell to a low of 12.5
percent.
IS THE AMERICAN MARKET STILL PROTECTED?

The last phase of our foreign economic policy to be considered
in this chapter is foreign economic aid. Since the close of World
War II our government has given away more than $40 billion and
the aid is still running at the rate of about $5 billion a year. Public opinion abroad as well as at home is becoming doubtful about
the wisdom of trying to rebuild and knit together the economies of
the free world on this basis. Increasingly the demand is heard
abroad that our assistance should take the form of "trade, not
aid."
Before discussing our foreign aid program we shall consider the
4
The Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act of 1934 was extended by the Congress in
1937, 1940, 1943, 1945, 1948, 1949, 1951, and 1953.

584

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

charge that the American market is still a highly protected market.
The figures cited at the end of the preceding section, if taken at
face value, appear to indicate that any economic difficulties foreign
countries are having are not due to the American tariff. There are
a number of reasons, however, for believing that our tariff is still
too protectionist in terms of our present position as the world's
greatest industrial and creditor country.
Averages misleading. In the first place an average figure, such as
the 5.6 percent given in the preceding discussion, proves very little
regarding the liberality of our terms of entry. This can be illustrated
as follows: Let us assume that the potential imports into a country,
i.e., all that would enter under completely free trade, consist of 10
commodities. Duties are levied on four of these as shown below,
while the others are admitted free, because they cannot be produced within the country.
Value of
Import
Commodity Duty
1
2
3
4
5

50
40
20
10

$

Duty Paid Percent of
$
Dutiables

none

none

100
200

40
40

1,000

100

10,000

none

Import Value
Free and
Dutiables

13.8

free 1
1.67

10

According to this table the average duty on all dutiable goods
is 13.8 percent, and on all free and dutiable goods it is only 1.7
percent. These figures take no account of the fact that the duty
on commodity 1 is so high as to exclude all imports, while those on
commodities 2 and 3 permit only token imports. The figures give
us no clue as to the quantities of these four commodities that are
excluded by the tariff. The freedom of entry accorded to commodities 5 to 10 is obviously not an evidence of liberality.
Customs procedures. In the second place the over-all averages in
the table reveal nothing regarding the bureaucratic red tape which
must be unwound before an importer can get goods cleared through
customs and find out just what he must pay in the way of duties.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

585

The complexities of our customs procedures are frequently more
protectionist than the duties themselves.
Relative costs. In the third place the substantial lowering of
duties on thousands of items does not prove that present rates are
necessarily less protectionist than the old Hawley-Smoot rates. If
our costs of production on these items have fallen more than the
costs of production abroad, and there is reason to believe that this
has frequently been the case, many rates may still be highly protective. Thus it is quite possible that there is a valid basis for the
widespread foreign charge levied against the American tariff.
Uncertainty. But the worst feature of our tariffs is their uncertainty. The concessions from the Hawley-Smoot rates have all been
for very short periods of time—never for more than three years and
frequently for as little as one year. Furthermore the Administration found it necessary, as the political price for the Congressional
renewal of the Act, to insert, first, an "escape clause" and, later, a
"peril point" clause into all agreements. The escape clause provides for the cancellation of any reduction "when the product on
which the concession has been granted, is, as a result, in whole or
in part, of the duty or other customs treatment . . . being imported
into the United States in such increased quantities, either actual or
relative, as to cause or threaten serious injury to the domestic industry producing like or competitive products."5 The "peril point"
clause requires the Tariff Commission to report to the President
"the degree of injury to an industry to be expected of a concession
under consideration."
In 1952 the attitude of foreign businessmen toward our tariffs
was reported to President Truman by his Secretary of Commerce
in the following language:
In each country we encountered inquiry as to our tariff policy, customs
procedures, and the probable attitude of the United States on the whole
question of trade relations. The feeling is general that the United States
can help in promoting healthy international trade by a lowering of tariff
barriers and a simplification of customs procedures. The latter is regarded as being as important as the lowering of tariff barriers.
In practically every country we visited the point was made that modification of United States tariff policy was not enough; it is important for
European businessmen to know that our tariff policy will not arbitrarily
be reversed when some European producer succeeds in marketing his
goods in the United States.
5
The escape clause as above quoted is from Sec. 6 of the Trade Agreement Extension
Act of 1951.

586

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

It was stated with considerable force that, before European businessmen incur the expense of promoting enterprises which will export commodities to the United States, they would need some assurance that these
investments will not be made valueless by subsequent prohibitive import
duties or by subsidies placed by our country upon competing articles.
Referring to American invocations of the "escape clause" the Secretary went on to point out that the concern of Europeans
. . . is much greater than is realized by the average American. We might
cite as examples recent United States Government actions affecting the
exportation of dried figs or raisins from Greece or Turkey to the United
States or cheese from several European countries.
While these actions were generally unknown to the general public in
the United States, they were well known, not only in the several countries
directly affected but all over Europe, and had not only economic but
psychological significance. It would be well for the Congress and our
Executive agencies dealing with such matters to be aware of the effect
which apparent unimportant actions taken by them can have upon the
economies of European countries.
Protection no longer in the national interest. Regardless of

whether high tariffs speeded the transformation of the American
economy from its early agrarian and raw material producing status
to its present status of advanced industrialism, they are no longer
in our national interest. The industries which would benefit from
free trade are our most efficient industries. The ever-present danger
of war does not alter the situation since, in general, our efficient industries are precisely the ones which are important in the event of
war. If there are others essential to national defense which would
be destroyed by free trade, they could be preserved by outright
subsidies.
An abrupt shift to complete free trade is neither politically possible nor economically desirable. Politically there are too many
vested interests that would be hurt. As a practical matter our
elected representatives not only must but should consider these interests. They are incorporated in the enterprises called into existence by our past protectionism. There would be large property
losses and considerable and unnecessary transitional unemployment
if the capital and labor attached to these enterprises were suddenly
forced to compete on equal terms with foreign enterprises.
Our own interests as well as those of our trading partners require that we avoid a major depression. Such a recession would
provoke governmental interventions which would further weaken

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

587

popular confidence in private enterprise. In any event it would almost certainly revive protectionist sentiment at home and strengthen
abroad the protectionist tendencies which we have been trying to
overcome for the past twenty years.
Fortunately the restoration of international trade does not require that we should adopt free trade now, however desirable that
may be as an ultimate goal. What is important now is that we
should see to it that all of our tariff duties on goods produced by
firms which still require protection are low enough, to permit foreign
suppliers to share the American market, and that we make it known
that these duties will not be raised even though, in the end, whole
industries have to be sacrificed as a result. One way of accomplishing this would be for the Congress to adopt the Reciprocal Trade
Agreement Act without a specified time limit and for the Executive to negotiate long-term trade treaties under its authority. This
would give foreign businessmen the assurance they need that the
American market is worth cultivating.
Stable tariffs lose their efficacy. The significant thing about moderate and durable tariff duties is that, in the course of time, they
lose their protectionist effect. The dollars which foreigners earn
by selling to us are spent for the goods and services of our efficient
industries. In time these industries will expand at the expense of
our less efficient industries. Their competition for resources will
raise the costs which the others must meet. To survive they must
be able to raise their prices, but if foreign goods are already entering our market they cannot do so.
Such a tariff policy would slow down but would not prevent
adaptations. International specialization and trade based upon the
principle of comparative advantage would bring about a slow contraction of our less efficient industries. As the durable equipment
in these industries wore out, invested capital would be withdrawn
in the form of liquidating dividends and reinvested in the expanding and efficient sectors of the economy. There would be no sudden
collapse of employment in these declining industries, particularly
if the workers attached to them were prepared to accept wages
slightly lower than those prevailing in the expanding industries.
Young workers would avoid the declining industries, and normal
turn-over and retirements would protect the jobs of those so specialized or so old as to make shifting difficult or impossible. Meantime, unemployment compensation would cushion the impact for
those workers who did lose their jobs as a result of the growth of

588

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

imports. Additional protection for this group could be provided by
authorizing the President to extend the unemployment compensation benefit period in a particular industry upon receipt of a declaration from the Tariff Commission that employment in that industry
was being seriously reduced as a result, in whole or in part, of the
duty or other customs treatment being accorded to foreign suppliers
of like or competitive products.
The conclusion reached in this section is that the American market is still a highly protected market. This fact introduces a fundamental inconsistency into our total foreign economic policy. In
particular, it makes it difficult for us to terminate the expensive
foreign aid program which has now been under way for more than
a decade.
FOREIGN AID
The extent of the aid. From the beginning of Lend-Lease 6 to
June 30, 1952, the American government had made available
through loans and gifts the grand total of over $90 billion in goods
and services to foreign lands. Approximately $40 billion of this
total represented military lend-lease aid. During the last months
of the war we gave some $3 billion through a special agency of the
newly created United Nations (the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration or UNRRA) to assist the populations in
the territories evacuated by the retreating German armies. Our
subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank provided further assistance through international
auspices. In the 8 years, 1945-1952, foreign aid totaled $37.3 billion, ranging from a high of $7.1 billion in 1945 to a low of $2.6
billion in 1947. It was still running at the $4.5-billion level in 1952,
seven years after the end of the war. Unlike our aid following
World War I, all of these vast sums were channeled through governments.
The results of the aid. Our wartime aid was responsible for the
final and complete defeat of Germany and Japan. It also contrib6
This Act, passed in March, 1941, nine months before our entry into the war, authorized the United States to supply munitions, materials, and food to any country which
the President might designate as aiding the defense of the United States. The Act
further provided that the final method of settlement should be such as not to burden
international trade. It also required that all countries receiving lend-lease aid should
agree to take action after the cessation of hostilities directed "to the elimination of all
forms of discriminatory treatment in international commerce, and to the reduction of
tariffs and other trade barriers." See William Adams Brown, Jr. and Redvers Opie,
American Foreign Assistance (Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.: 1953) for a
complete and up-to-date review of this vast foreign aid program.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

589

uted substantially to the industrial development of Russia.7 In
general, however, our Lend-Lease contributions to victory cannot
be counted as part of our contribution to world recovery. On
the contrary, it enabled our European allies to go on fighting until
they were closer to a complete economic breakdown than would
have otherwise been possible.
Our interest here is in knowing how effectively our postwar aid
has contributed to the rebuilding of a peaceful world economy.
Considering the conditions which prevailed in the summer and
fall of 1945, the progress in economic recovery has been striking.
A Brookings Institution study found that by the summer of 1951
the main objectives of our aid program in Europe "seemed to be
almost accomplished . . . most countries had achieved, or appeared
to be on the road to achieving, internal stability and prices and
money wages during the first six months of 1950 remained remarkably stable. . . . Outside Europe progress was also being made in
repairing the dislocations and devastations of war."8
In December 1952, the United States Secretary of Commerce reported to the President that he and the members of his European
mission "had been impressed by the tremendous recovery" that
had been made by all of the countries which had been assisted by
our aid programs. They had found the general level of economic
activity to be about 40 percent above prewar.
Our objectives. Judged, however, by what we had hoped to accomplish, the results left much to be desired. We wanted to
re-establish intra-European trade and triangular trade between
Western Europe, the poor and populous raw-material-producing
countries outside the Russian orbit, and the United States, by which
Western Europe would earn the dollars it needed by an excess of
exports to the raw-material-producing countries, and they, in turn,
would earn dollars by their favorable balances with the United
States. In brief, we sought to create a broad European free-trade
market (European integration) which would lend itself to the application of American mass production techniques, and to integrate
this market into a larger "free-world" market made up of the British
Commonwealth of Nations, Greece, Turkey and the vast and populous areas to which the term "the underdeveloped countries" had
come to be applied.
Until this larger integration has been accomplished, the Amer7
Russia received almost $11 billions of lend-lease aid. An appreciable fraction of this
took the form of industrial equipment.
8
Current Issues in Foreign Economic Assistance (1951).

590

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

ican aid program cannot be called a success. This was the verdict
reached by Professor Howard Ellis, past President of the American
Economics Association in a study he made for the Council on Foreign Relations. He found the accomplishments, as judged by the
test of effective integration, to have been few and the results disappointing.9
The emergence of Point 4. With the outbreak of war in Korea,
American foreign aid was increasingly earmarked for military preparedness. Only with respect to the Point 4 program for "underdeveloped countries,'' announced by President Truman in his 1949
Inaugural Address, was economic aid given primacy over military
assistance. The declared purpose of this program was to give to
the peoples in the relatively underdeveloped countries access to
our technical knowledge and our scientific methods of analyzing
and solving social and economic problems. It was to enable them to
hire technical experts in various fields (health, education, road
building, power plant construction, and factory layout) rather than
to buy and import modern capital goods. It would be up to the
peoples concerned to raise domestically or borrow abroad the capital needed to implement the development programs recommended
by the experts. As the President pointed out, the material resources
which we could provide were highly limited, whereas the imponderable resources in technical knowledge were constantly growing
and inexhaustible.
Had the Korean war not broken out, our economic aid to Europe
was scheduled to terminate as of fiscal 1951. Had that happened
it seems probable that there would have been a serious economic
relapse in Western Europe unless, indeed, we had been prepared
to put far more into the Point 4 program than had been suggested
by the President's announcement.
It would thus appear that the method of bringing about an integrated recovery pursued by the United States since 1945 requires
an almost indefinite continuation of American grants-in-aid to
many, if not most, of the countries of the free world. If this is so,
it is difficult to escape the conclusion that there has been something
wrong with the method. Surely a free gift of some $40 billion
should have sufficed to restore a workable international economy in
which each country would be able to earn its own way.
Why the effort failed. It should be recognized, however, that the
adaptation we sought to promote was bound to be very difficult.
The cold war with Russia had torn an important part of the world
9 The Economics of Freedom (1951) pp. 370-1.

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( G O N T ' D )

591

from old fabric of trade. Trading relations with the countries within
the Russian orbit had almost ceased, and it was our avowed objective to break them off entirely. This meant that new channels
of trade had to be started. Unless we were prepared to make our
vast internal market the focal center for a new trade pattern, the
densely populated and industrialized countries of Western Europe
could dispense with outside help only at the expense of a considerable fall in their levels of living. Meantime the burden of armament, as pointed out earlier, had placed a heavy mortgage on their
resources, and the ever-present threat of war made international
investments seem exceptionally risky.
The very magnitude of the problem made it all the more impor*
tant that our foreign economic policy should promote and not
block the desired adaptations. The reductions in our tariff barriers, while not sufficient, represented a constructive contribution
to our over-all objective.
It is difficult to escape the conclusion, however, that our foreign
aid program involved serious inconsistencies. These inconsistencies
appear to have been due to our unwillingness to recognize that the
re-establishment of the automatic and impersonal mechanisms of
the market are essential prerequisites to the international integration we sought to promote. Instead of assisting countries to reestablish private enterprise, we virtually forced them to adopt
national plans and then to iron out the inevitable conflicts in plans
through political negotiations. We failed to recognize that this is
a task that politicians, however well-intentioned they may be,
simply cannot accomplish. What had to come first was a leveling
of trade barriers, the introduction of stable and dependable currencies, and the restoration of reasonable free movements of goods
from country to country on the basis of price differences. In the
absence of international price comparisons and international competition, it was quite impossible to know what enterprises should
be rebuilt in the different countries, and what historic lines of
activity should be expanded or contracted. Hence, as physical
recovery proceeded, it became increasingly apparent that many
lines of activity in every country would have to be protected, if
they were to survive. Consequently it became increasingly difficult
to get rid of the tariffs, quotas, and exchange controls which blocked
the creation of the wide international markets essential to high
productivity. By encouraging the assisted countries to put domestic recovery ahead of stable and convertible currencies and moderate and stable tariffs, we made impossible the fulfillment of the

592

AMERICAN FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

high hopes which the performance of the American economy had
aroused, unless indeed we were prepared to continue foreign economic aid indefinitely.
CONCLUSION
In this and the two preceding chapters we have traced the foreign economic policy of the United States during the last 50 years.
We have noted a growing awareness of the fact that our position
as a Great Power in a highly interdependent world requires that we
build up strength and material well being in the free world. There
has been a far greater reduction in American tariffs than anyone
would have dared predict 20 years ago. Unfortunately the fear of
competition has prevented us from giving foreign businessmen the
assurances they need that recent tariff concessions will be continued should they succeed in developing profitable markets within
the United States. It has also led us to try to protect our domestic
market indirectly by encouraging the governments of other countries to impose wage and welfare standards (through the ILO, for
example) that they cannot yet afford.
Just as this misplaced humanitarianism has forced us into expensive domestic federal aid programs, so too it has induced us to
undertake an extraordinarily expensive foreign aid program which
cannot easily be terminated. Yet sooner or later it will have to
terminate. Sound international relations cannot be built on gifts.
One of the great tasks confronting the American Congress today
is the formulation of a sound long-term economic policy and a
transitional short-term program which will preserve for us any
national benefits that may have accrued from our emergency postWorld War II policies and which will, at the same time, be consistent with the kind of social and economic system we are trying to
preserve at home.
Questions:
1. Describe briefly the origin, organization, and objectives of the ILO,
the procedures for realizing its objectives, and its concrete accomplishments.
2. "There is a striking similarity between the objectives of the ILO
and the American New Deal." Indicate the points of resemblance
suggested by this statement.
3. Explain (a) the difference between an ILO Recommendation and

CONTEMPORARY ISSUES ( C O N T ' D )

593

an ILO Convention, and (b) why Conventions have raised the
issues of "states' rights in the United States."
4. Discuss critically the wage theory which appears to be accepted by
the majority of the delegates to the ILO conferences and compare
it with that underlying our own Fair Labor Standards Act.
5. "A persuasive case can be made in support of the proposition that
the influence of the ILO is thrown in support of a form of protectionism that is more detrimental to the long-run interests of the
industrially underdeveloped countries than are high protective
tariffs/' Defend or rebut.
6. Identify the ITO, the objectives which it sought to realize, the appropriateness of the procedures provided in its charter for realizing
these objectives, and the present status of the proposal.
7. Identify GATT, the constitutional authority for the trade agreements
negotiated under GATT, and the reasons why American tariffs may
still be effectively protective.
8. Explain the thesis defended in the text that, although protection is
no longer in the national interest, the immediate adoption of complete free trade is neither necessary nor desirable as a means of
exposing the American market to effective competition.
9. (a) Compare the pattern of territorial specialization and trade
that existed prior to 1914 with that which we have tried to develop
through our participation in the International Monetary Fund, the
International Bank, and our foreign aid and Point 4 programs.
(b) Explain why, according to the text, the large dollar sums made
available through the Fund, the Bank, and the direct aid programs
failed to bring about this new pattern of specialization.
(c) Outline the kind of foreign economy policy the authors regard as consistent with the requirements of the kind of economic
system we are presumably trying to maintain domestically.
10. Argue for or against the thesis that poor countries could not successfully compete for American private savings even if they were
able and willing to provide the kind of environment needed to
attract private investment funds.

PART TEN

Fiscal Policy

41
Fiscal Policy
ana Private Enterprise

Fiscal policy defined. The word "fiscal" in the term "fiscal policy"
refers to the spending, taxing, and borrowing of government. The
word "policy" in the phrase indicates that the problem of objectives
is involved. What are the proper objectives of fiscal policy? Our
concern in this chapter is limited to an identification and appraisal
of objectives that are generally regarded as consistent with the
operating requirements of a private enterprise system. The fiscal
policy objectives appropriate for a socialistically organized society
are discussed in Chapter 45.
Fiscal policy objectives classified. Any attempt at a clear-cut
classification of fiscal policy objectives involves oversimplification.
One set of objectives grades into the next set. Nonetheless it will be
easier to understand the evolution of our own federal, state, and
local finances if we recognize four sets of policy objectives which
have successively represented what may be called "the prevailing
view." With a view to identifying each set of objectives briefly we
shall refer to them as (1) orthodox or traditional fiscal policy, (2)
traditional humanitarian-welfare fiscal policy, (3) orthodox compensatory fiscal policy, and (4) humanitarian full-employment fiscal
policy. For purposes of analysis we shall rearrange the sequence,
treating compensatory fiscal policy immediately after orthodox fiscal
policy.
Needless to say the actual evolution of federal, state, and local
public finances has not waited upon the intellectual formulation of
these four sets of objectives. Political and economic forces have
shaped the course of events. In one sense these fiscal policy positions represent no more than a rationalization of prevailing practices.
597

598

FISCAL POLICY

Yet in another sense they have prepared the way by providing the
political and economic arguments for those special interest groups
that wanted to bring about a change in the functions of governments
and in the distribution of the burden of supporting those functions.
ORTHODOX FISCAL POLICY
Orthodox fiscal policy is based on the assumption that market
forces tend to keep the economy operating at full employment and
to distribute the national output among factor owners in accordance
with the importance of their contributions to the over-all results.
The main responsibility of government, therefore, is to maintain
the conditions that are necessary if market forces are, in fact, to
promote the general welfare. Adam Smith's summing up of the
three principal duties of the sovereign in Book V of his Wealth of
Nations still represents the most compact statement of the orthodox
position regarding the proper functions of government:
According to the system of natural liberty, the sovereign has only three
duties to attend to; three duties of great importance, indeed, but plain
and intelligible to common understandings: I. the duty of protecting the
society from the violence and invasion of other independent societies; II.
the duty of protecting, as far as possible, every member of the society
from the injustice or oppression of every other member of it, or the duty
of establishing an exact administration of justice; and III. the duty of
erecting and maintaining certain public works and certain public institutions, which it can never be for the interest of any individual, or small
number of individuals, to erect and maintain, because the profit could
never repay the expense to any individual or small number of individuals,
though it may frequently do much more than repay it to a great society.1
This statement of the functions of government provides the tests
to be applied to orthodox fiscal policy objectives.
Government spending. The expenditures of government are determined by the need for funds to carry out as economically as possible the limited number of functions which can be performed only
by the State. This spending involves the transfer of resources from
the private to the public domain. The transfer is to be effected
through the prices which the State offers to resource owners. These
prices should be just sufficient and no more than sufficient to bring
about the transfers. They should not be higher simply because the
State can raise additional funds through its power to tax. Nor should
1
The reader is referred to the discussion of the State in Chapter 20 for evidence
that the last of Smith's functions is formulated in such a way as to give the whole
statement a considerable degree of elasticity and adaptability to changing conditions.

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

599

they be lower because the State can compel individuals to part with
their resources at less than market prices through the exercise of its
"police power." In brief, the phrase "as economically as possible"
means that the State's bids for resources should be based on the
prices prevailing in the private sector of the economy.
Government revenues. The government's revenues should equal
its spending and be determined entirely by the spending requirements of the government. Public functions should not be expanded
simply because tax and other revenue receipts happen to exceed
the current level of spending. Rather the government should reduce
the amount that it takes from the citizens as taxpayers in order to
leave them as consumers larger incomes to use as they choose.
The distribution of the burden. The State's power to tax enables
it to distribute the burden of supporting government in a wide
variety of ways. It can place the burden almost entirely on the
broad masses (as was the practice under mercantilism), or on the
minority of wealthy persons, or it can be spread over all the people
roughly in proportion to their incomes. A revenue system of the
first sort is known as regressive, one of the second sort as progressive,
while the third is referred to as proportional. Furthermore the State
can finance part of its current needs by borrowing. This borrowing
may be in the open market where the government is forced to compete with private firms and individuals for loanable funds. But the
State can also issue fiat money or compel the Central Bank to lend
to it at an artificially low rate of interest.
Borrowing. In general the orthodoxfiscalpolicy position is hostile
to borrowing except for well-defined purposes. Leaving aside the
problem of the propriety of borrowing to finance a war, the general
orthodox rule is that the government may properly borrow in the
open market those funds needed to finance long-lived public improvements, provided it increases its levies on the citizens in succeeding years to pay the interest and repay the principal of the loan
within the economic life of the improvements. Thus, if a public
courthouse is going to cost the people in a small community $500,000
and it is expected to last for 50 years, there is no objection in principle to finance the building by a loan rather than a temporary and
very sharp increase in the levy on the citizens of the community
during the building period.
Paying for current expenses. The portion of the State's expenditures that are to be financed with nonborrowed funds fall into two
categories. First, there are those that benefit identifiable individuals
in a way that can be measured, or those that are due to public activ-

600

FISCAL POLICY

ities which are made necessary by the activities of private persons
and private firms. Second, and much more important, are the public
expenditures that benefit the whole society but not any given individual in a way that can be precisely measured. The orthodox position is that expenses of the first sort should be charged to the persons
who receive the measurable benefits or who are responsible for the
public activities and hence the public expenditures. The balance of
the public expenditures should be met through taxes levied on the
citizens in proportion to their incomes.
This concept of proportionality is embodied in the first of Adam
Smith's famous maxims or canons of taxation. "The subjects of every
state ought to contribute toward the support of the government, as
nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities; that is,
in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under
the protection of the State." The assumption here is that the existing distribution of incomes, in so far as it conforms with functionally correct factoral rewards, is "just" to exactly the same extent that
the enterprise system itself is "just." If monopolies and restrictive
practices have created economically unjustifiable differentials in
factoral rewards and hence an ethically indefensible personal distribution of rewards, the State should take steps to eliminate the
objectionable practices rather than tolerate them and then try to
correct them through taxation.
This breakdown of current expenditures into special and general
categories provides the basis for a similar breakdown of the devices
for raising revenues. Special expenditures should be defrayed, as far
as possible, by special levies related to the services provided by the
State. These services may be of a commercial or of a noncommercial
character. Expenditures for general purposes which cannot be covered by special levies should be paid for through taxes of various
sorts. Fees, prices, licenses, and special assessments are the names
given to the principal public charges that fall in the first category.
They obviously conform most closely with the quid pro quo principle of the private enterprise system. The State renders a vendable
service and levies a charge to cover the costs, or it is forced to incur
an expense which is in the general interest but which is due to the
activities of identifiable parties and it requires that they pay the
costs.
A general textbook in economics is not the place to discuss in
detail the nature of these special charges. It suffices here to point
out that orthodox fiscal policy favors the generous use of these
levies both because of their conformity with the rationale of a

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

601

market economy and because they reduce the portion of the public
spending which must be met through taxes—the second and much
the more important category of devices needed to meet the current
expenditures of the State.
It was regarding taxes that Adam Smith declared that they should
be levied as nearly as possible in proportion to the revenues which
the citizens enjoy under the protection of the State. Ideally, the best
tax, according to this maxim, would be a universal and proportional
tax on the net incomes of the citizens. If 10 percent of the personal
incomes of the citizens is needed to meet public expenditures which
have not been met by borrowing or by the special quid pro quo
levies, then each and every personal income, large and small, should
be liable to a 10 percent tax.
Other maxims or canons of taxation. Administrative considerations make it impossible for the State to rely entirely on a single
universal and proportional personal income tax. The cost of collecting from persons with very small incomes would be excessively high.
Furthermore the definition and the measurement of net income are
far from simple. It presupposes that all taxpayers keep elaborate
records and properly distinguish between their gross receipts and
the expenses incurred in the earning of their gross receipts, including proper allowances for write-offs for depreciation and obsolescence. Income in kind, which is very important in the case of
farmers, is difficult to capture.
For these and other reasons orthodox fiscal policy recognizes the
desirability of a variety of special taxes each designed to reach the
personal incomes of the citizens in a particular way. Adam Smith's
maxim of proportionality is regarded as applying to the totality of
the taxes rather than to any one of them. For the taxes taken individually, Smith suggested three other maxims which deserve to be
quoted in full, because they are as applicable to the conditions prevailing today as they were to those with which Smith was concerned.
2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain,
and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the
quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor,
and to every other person. . . .
3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which
it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. . . .
4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep
out of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above what
it brings into the public treasury of the State. A tax may either take out
or keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings

602

FISCAL POLICY

into the public treasury, in the four following ways. First, the levying of
it may require great numbers of officers, . . . Secondly, it may obstruct
the industry of the people, and discourage them from applying to certain
branches of business which might give maintenance and employment to
great multitudes. . . . Thirdly, by the forfeitures and other penalties
which those unfortunate individuals incur who attempt unsuccessfully to
evade the tax, it may frequently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the
benefit which the community might have received from the employment
of their capitals. . . . Fourthly, by subjecting the people to the frequent
visits and the odious examination of the tax-gatherers it may expose them
to much unnecessary trouble, vexation, and oppression; and though vexation is not, strictly speaking, expense, it is certainly equivalent to the
expense at which every man would be willing to redeem himself from it.
In the next chapter we shall have occasion to note the multiplicity
of special taxes which modern governments use to secure the revenues needed to cover an expanding array of public functions. At
this point we merely want to point out that many of these taxes take
relatively more from persons with small incomes than from those
with larger incomes. As a consequence the tax system as a whole
tends to be regressive unless a sufficient degree of progression is
introduced into the income tax and the death duties.
This situation led many proponents of orthodox fiscal policy to
advocate the introduction of progression into the personal income
tax and into the death duties long before government even ventured
to try to tax incomes directly or to levy on the estates of decedents.
It was argued that the concept of proportionality for the tax system
as a whole constituted an adequate safeguard against the danger
that the progression might be pushed so far as to weaken the incentives on which the private enterprise system depends.
Today orthodox fiscal policy is dismissed as "reactionary." It is
well to remember that at the time it enjoyed its greatest repute it
was "radical" in the sense that it called for a lightening of the tax
burden resting on those at the bottom of the income scale and the
spreading of it equally over all income classes.
To sum up, the orthodox fiscal policy position is as follows: (1)
the State should take from the citizens no more than is necessary
to the effective performance of a relatively limited number of functions; (2) it should raise as much as possible of these revenues
through special levies on individuals and firms that derive special
and measurable benefits from its activities or that are directly and
measurably responsible for the need for these governmental activities; (3) the State should raise the balance through a combination

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

603

of borrowing (to cover large and irregular outlays resulting in the
creation of durable public goods) and taxing; (4) the taxes, taken
individually, should be certain, convenient, and economical, and,
taken as a whole, should be proportional; and (5) the taxes should
be adequate in the sense of sufficient to cover regular and recurrent
expenses and to reduce the outstanding public debt at least as
rapidly as the wear and tear (depreciation and obsolescence) of the
durable assets which occasioned the debt.
ORTHODOX COMPENSATORY FISCAL POLICY

The impact of pre-Keynesian business cycle theories on orthodox
fiscal policy objectives was relatively slight. These theories all
stressed the need for flexibility in labor and capital markets and for
the tendency for depressions to taper off and give way to recoveries.
Most of them recognized, however, that the forces making for a
contraction feed upon themselves for a time and hence lead to a
greater contraction than is needed to prepare the way for a rearrangement of the production-mix in accordance with changes in the
pattern of consumer spending and saving as it manifests itself at
the upper turning point of the cycle. This line of thought led to a
fairly general agreement that the government could carry out its
functions (by and large, the same functions as those regarded as
appropriate by orthodox fiscal policy) in a way that would reduce
the amplitude of the up- and downswings of the business cycle.
Budgeting for the cycle. Specifically it was quite generally held
that the government should deliberately refrain during good times
from launching costly projects involving the creation of durable
public goods, like school houses, public buildings, roads, etc., and
then push them during the downswing of the cycle. It was further
held that the government should maintain its current operations and
its spending for these purposes, even though the decline in the yield
of cyclically sensitive taxes made it necessary for government to
borrow money. In other words, government should not hesitate to
go into debt during depression periods.
Debt policy. There was no tendency, however, to regard debt
creation as good per se. On the contrary, most non-Keynesian business cycle theorists held that the success of the fiscal policy which
they recommended depended upon the ability of the government to
repay during the ensuing recovery the entire debt incurred during
the depression for the purpose of maintaining current expenditures.
The general rule regarding the repayment of debt incurred to finance long-lived improvements was modified only to the extent that

604

FISCAL POLICY

repayment should be suspended during a recession and then resumed at an accelerated rate once a recovery was well under way.
If we describe the orthodox position as favoring the annual balancing of the regular operating expenditures of government, the
one here under consideration may be described as favoring cycle
balancing of expenditures and revenues. Both accept the principle
of the balanced budget. The first, however, would treat each 12month period as a natural unit of time and keep revenues and expenditures in balance on an annual basis (always with an allowance
for long-term borrowing to finance long-term improvements). The
second modifies this position only to the extent of holding that the
appropriate unit of time is the period in which the economy moves
through the four phases of the cycle, and that the balance should
occur over this longer unit of time.
Summarizing, compensatory fiscal policy accepts the main points
of orthodox policy: (1) a budget balanced at the level determined
by the normal functions of the State; (2) no effort to change the
personal distribution of income through taxing and spending; (2)
no long-term debt creation except for purposes of adding to the
durable assets of the State. The only significant change is in the
concept of the balancing period, the cycle and not an arbitrary 12month period. This change countenances temporary debt creation
in depression periods to maintain current expenditures, but requires
the repayment of this debt in the ensuing recovery period.
TRADITIONAL HUMANITARIAN-WELFARE
FISCAL POLICY
It rejects large personal inequalities. The fiscal policy objectives

to be discussed here grow out of the idea that gross personal income
inequalities are in and of themselves undesirable and that they cannot be reduced to socially tolerable limits through improving the
competitiveness of market forces. The market, no matter how perfect, is bound to produce increasing inequalities over time because
of the great differences in individual capacities and the cumulative
role played by the right of bequest. Consequently the State must
protect the market and keep it competitive, but it must do more
than that.
It advocates taxing for equalization purposes. The State must use

its power to tax and to spend in order to reduce personal inequalities. Through expenditures on education, on health, on slum clearance, old-age assistance, etc., it can reduce the number and improve
the quality of those who bring to the market the most abundant and

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

605

hence the least-rewarded skills. In time, education will change the
composition of the labor force, raising the rewards going to the
relatively unskilled and decreasing those going to the more skilled.
Meantime, personal inequalities will be further reduced by requiring
the wealthy minority to provide much more than their proportionate
share of the costs of this public investment in society's human resources. All this can be done without interfering with market forces
directly. They are to be permitted to determine, in the first instance, factoral rewards and hence the personal distribution of incomes. The State then undertakes a secondary redistribution of the
national income more in accord with "justice."
Taxes should be based on ability. Adherents of what may be
called "capitalistic humanitarianism" accept the orthodox position
that the State should balance its budget and should fix its spending
and its revenue requirements in accordance with the requirements
of its enlarged welfare functions. But instead of Adam Smith's
maxim that each citizen should pay taxes in proportion to the revenues which he enjoys under the protection of the State, members
of this school of thought argue that the distribution of the burden
should be according to ability. This, they point out, was the way
in which Smith first phrased his maxim, and that error crept in
when he held that ability varies directly and proportionately with
"revenue," whereas in fact ability to pay increases more than in
proportion to "revenue."
Diminishing marginal utility. The development of the theory of
diminishing marginal utility during the last quarter of the 19th century has been used to support the case for making the revenue system as a whole progressive. This concept, it will be recalled, was
first used to explain the response of a person to the offer of additional units of a single standardized product. It explains why, beyond a certain point, the acquisition of each additional unit yields
less satisfaction than that derived from the preceding unit. Consequently an individual will attempt to distribute his total demand
(as represented by a supply of money) over an array of goods in
such fashion as to equalize the satisfactions derived from the last
dollar spent on each of the goods in his possession.
The advocates of progressive taxation claim that the principle of
diminishing marginal utility applies to income itself. It is held that,
as income increases, the added satisfaction derived from each addition to income is less than that derived from the preceding increment. Consequently, the transfer of a unit of income from the
richest man in the community to the poorest man in the community

606

FISCAL POLICY

will increase the total satisfactions derived by the community taken
as a whole. The loss of satisfactions experienced by the richest man
will be less than the increase in satisfactions experienced by the
poorest man. Logically the richest man should be taxed until his
income is brought down to that of the second richest man and thereafter their incomes should be brought down to that of the third,
etc., while the proceeds are used to bring the income of the poorest
man up to that of the second poorest, and then their incomes should
be raised to that of the third poorest, etc.
Space limitations do not permit us to discuss the weighty objections that have been raised to the application of the principle of
diminishing marginal utility to money and money incomes.2 It suffices here to note that the argument leads logically to the conclusion
that complete income equality represents the best distribution of
incomes in the sense that anything less than complete income equality will diminish the total satisfactions which the community might
enjoy.
During the long agitation for the adoption of progressive income
and death duties, the opposition pointed out the implication of the
argument and predicted that, if governments once abandoned the
principle of proportionality, they would be like ships without a
rudder. Political forces would inevitably drive them onto the shoals
surrounding the harbor of complete income equality and that it
would be necessary to throw overboard the heavy but powerful
motor of self-interest to prevent the ship from foundering. Once
within the harbor the ship of state would have to stay there, protected from the international trade winds and the rough waves of
domestic and foreign competition. Passengers and crew alike would
soon find that life aboard ship was cramped, monotonous, and
austere. The possibility that the captain might have to exercise
tyrannical powers to keep order was not seriously considered until
after Professor Mises's attack on socialism in the early 1920s.3
These fears of the opponents of progression were brushed aside
as examples of the danger of basing policy on pure logic. The good
sense of the people could be counted on to halt the process of equalization at the point where any further attempts at dividing the
existing pie (the national output) more evenly would result in a
reduction of the size of the pie to be divided tomorrow.
2
Walter J. Blum and Harry Kalven, Jr., The Uneasy Case for Progressive Taxation,
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1953; Bertrand de Jouvenal, The Ethics
of Income Redistribution, Oxford University Press, Oxford: 1951; F. A. Hayek, "The
Case against Progressive Taxation," The Freeman, Dec. 28, 1953, pp. 229-231.
3 See p. 654.

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

607

The fiscal policy objectives of humanitarian welfare capitalism
were formulated and urged prior to those described in the preceding
section. They differ from orthodox fiscal policy primarily in two
respects: (1) They would widen the functions of the State and
hence its spending by undertaking activities which would improve
the capacity of the poor to help themselves. (2) They would distribute the burden of supporting these activities in such fashion as
to reduce personal income inequalities. It is not until later that they
get linked up with compensatory fiscal policy, on the one hand, or
humanitarian full-employment fiscal policy, on the other.
HUMANITARIAN FULL-EMPLOYMENT FISCAL POLICY

With the appearance of Keynes' General Theory the controversy
regarding the appropriate fiscal policy objectives for a private enterprise economy became more animated. In general the adherents
of welfare capitalism embraced the Keynesian set of objectives
wholeheartedly just as most adherents of orthodox fiscal policy accepted the modifications of fiscal policy suggested by orthodox
business cycle theories. Thus, at the present time, most economists
can be classified as adherents of orthodox compensatory fiscal policy
or of the fiscal policy to be discussed in this section.
We propose here to summarize very briefly the policy objectives
that can be logically derived from the Keynesian analysis. Actually
there is a considerable overlap of the two schools of thought regarding fiscal policy, just as there is a similar overlap between most of
the orthodox theories of the business cycle and that based on the
theory of effective demand. Few authors push their theories to their
logical conclusions, but there are always men seeking public office
who show less restraint when an extreme argument can be turned
to their advantage.
Budgeting for full employment. A point to note here is that the
Keynesian analysis greatly strengthens the humanitarian argument
in favor of income equalization. Regardless of how far income
equalization may have already gone, still greater income equalization
is urged not merely because it will tend to increase total community
satisfactions, but also because it will help solve the saving-investment dilemma which may, at any time, bring on a depression. A
proper objective of fiscal policy is not budget balancing over the
cycle. That is too timid an objective. The proper aim is budgeting
for full employment. The State, and only the State, is supposed to
be able to produce surpluses and deficits in its accounts of the size

608

FISCAL POLICY

needed to offset fluctuations in business spending (capital formation) and in the nation's foreign account.
The role of the public debt. This position leads to a radical change
in the significance assigned to the public debt. The debt is no longer
to be regarded as a public burden to be avoided where possible and
to be repaid as rapidly as possible when incurred to finance current
operations. Debt creation is now regarded as an appropriate, although not the only, means of creating the volume of effective demand needed to encourage the growth of the national economy, the
maintenance of full employment, and the translation of increasing
per capita output into increasing factoral rewards, with an increasing
share of these rewards going to wages and a decreasing share to
interest.
The idea that a growing national debt represents a growing burden is held to be fallacious, at least in so far as the debt is domestically held. The real burden of the debt is the interest charge and
the taxes needed to pay the charge; the payments themselves are
nothing more than internal transfer payments. If the distribution of
the tax burden happened to correspond with the distribution of the
bond holding, the net burden would clearly be represented by the
cost of collecting the tax and distributing the interest—an insignificant item in the gross national product. But even if this happy coincidence is lacking, the net burden is still the same. All that happens
is that the taxes and the interest payments cause a slight change in
the personal distribution of the national income. In a society with
an unequal personal distribution of wealth and income, this change
runs in favor of the wealthy, but this effect can easily be offset by a
slight increase in the progressivity of the personal income tax and of
the death duties on large estates.
If the national debt is growing, the thing to watch is the total
interest charge expressed as a fraction of the gross national income.
As long as the gross national income is increasing faster than the
interest charge, there is no cause for alarm. The debt itself is never
a burden. All that it does is measure uncovered government spending of earlier periods. If that spending was misdirected and wasteful,
then the community today is less well equipped with real capital
than might otherwise be the case. The thing to scrutinize, therefore,
is the character of the spending and not the source from which the
funds are derived. In times of serious unemployment, debt-financed
public spending that creates employment is almost sure to be productive since it uses labor that would otherwise be idle. Hence the
opportunity cost is virtually nil.

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

609

Functional finance. An extreme but logical extension of the fiscal
policy objectives here under consideration is the concept of "functional finance" which is associated with the name of Professor Abba
Lerner and to which reference was made in the earlier discussion of
a completely managed currency system.4 According to this doctrine
the main purpose of taxation is not to raise money to cover the expenses of the State, but rather to withdraw from circulation an excess
of purchasing power which threatens to cause inflation in an economy operating at the full employment level. Conversely an increase
in public expenditures is not to be undertaken primarily to enable
the State to perform old functions better or to add new service functions, but primarily to get more purchasing power into the hands of
the citizens so as to prevent a decrease in effective demand which
threatens to produce unemployment. This purpose can be accomplished equally well by a reduction of taxes, with expenditures
maintained.
We have now completed our very brief review of four views
regarding the proper fiscal policy objectives for a private enterprise
economy. In the next chapter we shall trace in very summary fashion the development of taxing, spending, and borrowing at the
federal, state, and local levels and note how far we have moved
toward the fourth set of objectives. But before doing that there is
need for a few words regarding the compatibility of these various
objectives with the political requirements of our federal form of
government.
FISCAL POLICY AND FEDERALISM

According to traditional American political theory ultimate sovereignty rests with the people. They form a government and give
to it such elements of sovereignty as are necessary to permit them to
live at peace with one another and to get certain things done which,
to quote Adam Smith, "though they may be in the highest degree
advantageous to a great society, are, however, of such a nature that
the profit could never repay the expense to any individual or small
number of individuals/'
At the outbreak of the American Revolution the American people
gave these necessary elements of sovereignty to their state governments. Following the successful war of independence the people
discovered that their several states were using the sovereignty entrusted to them in such fashion as to provoke discord and the danger
of war between the states. Accordingly they agreed to form a more
* See p. 296.

610

FISCAL POLICY

perfect union and to transfer to a central government to be established on a site ceded by the states of Maryland and Virginia a few
limited and enumerated powers, including the power to borrow
money and to levy directly on the citizens of the several states for
the funds needed to discharge these limited functions. Section 8 of
Article I of the Constitution provided:
The Congress shall have the power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defense
and the general welfare of the United States; but all duties, imposts and
excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.
This uniformity requirement prevented the federal government
from making effective use of the income tax prior to the passage of
the Sixteenth Amendment in 1913. This amendment authorized the
Congress "to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source
derived, without apportionment among the several states, and without regard to any census or enumeration."
The purpose of this section is to note the changes in the original
concept of federalism that become necessary if the fiscal policies of
the federal, state, and local governments are to promote the objectives involved in the four sets of objectives set forth in the immediately preceding pages.
Federalism and orthodox fiscal policy. The problem of reconciliation does not arise in connection with the orthodox set offiscalpolicy
objectives. The states and the federal government both possess revenue sources amply sufficient to carry out the very limited functions
sanctioned by this school of thought. Indeed, the original concept of
federalism and the then prevailing orthodox fiscal policy views
proved entirely compatible over the first hundred years of the union.
The complications arose when public opinion began to demand
that the federal government play a more active role in the economic
life of the country.
Federalism and compensatoryfiscalpolicy. The inherent difficulty
in connection with compensatory fiscal policy is in getting 48 states
and the thousands of counties, towns, and cities within these states
to maintain current expenditures during bad times and to expand
and contract postponable public works in unison and in a countercyclical fashion. As we shall see later, state revenues are exceedingly
sensitive to the fluctuations in general business conditions. The
public demands that public improvements be undertaken when additional tax money is easily come by, and it also demands rigid economies and tax reductions when depression hits. Theoretically the

FISCAL POLICY AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

611

states could do the job. The difficulty is that if some states pursued
this policy while neighboring states did not, movements of unemployed workers from the states which refused to "play by the new
rules" might defeat the efforts of those which adopted the new rules.
This situation forces advocates of compensatory fiscal policy to
consider ways and means by which the federal government could
induce the states to synchronize their fiscal policies. Since this issue
arises still more acutely in connection with the next two sets of policy
objectives, no more need be said about it at this point.
Federalism and humanitarian-welfare fiscal policy. Federalism

effectively blocks a resolute pursuit of egalitarian welfare objectives
by the several states. High progressive taxation of personal incomes
by state governments is impossible unless all unilaterally agree to
adopt roughly the same rates. Nor can the states undertake to carry
out the many welfare programs called for by this set of fiscal policy
objectives unless all the others do likewise. The complete freedom,
guaranteed by the Constitution, of people and of capital to move
across state lines forces the states, acting individually, to adhere
fairly closely to what we have called orthodoxfiscalpolicy objectives.
Federalism and humanitarian full-employment fiscal policy.

Everything that has been said about the incompatibility of federalism, as it was originally conceived, applies a fortiori to humanitarian
full-employment fiscal policy. If the people want this kind of a fiscal
policy they must accept far-reaching changes in functions assigned
to the federal government and in the allocation of tax resources as
among the federal government and the states and their political
subdivisions.
We shall have occasion in the next chapter to see the ways in
which we have attempted to reconcile our political attachment to
federalism with our desire to have government play a larger role in
economic affairs.

Questions:
1. Define "fiscal policy" and identify the four sets of fiscal policy objectives discussed in this chapter.
2. Describe briefly the basic assumptions which appear to underlie each
of these four fiscal policy objectives.
3. Argue for or against the proposition that Adam Smith's formulation
of the duties of the sovereign justify many of the activities carried on
by modern governments.

612

FISCAL POLICY

4. "The State's power to tax enables it to distribute the burden of supporting the State in a variety of ways." Describe the various ways
in which the modern state raises revenues and indicate with respect
to each whether (a) it is based on the ability-to-pay principle or
the benefit principle, and (b) it is regressive, proportional, or progressive in its effect.
5. Define the terms ability-to-pay, the benefit principle, regressive, proportional and progressive taxation.
6. Describe briefly Smith's famous "canons of taxation."
7. Discuss critically the arguments for and against the proposition that
the principle of diminishing marginal utility justifies the use of
highly progressive taxation.
8. Discuss critically the thesis that a domestic debt is socially costless.
Relate this discussion to the discussions of the method of financing
World War II as set forth in Chapter 25.

42
American Fiscal Policy

V^/F THE four views discussed in
the preceding chapter, orthodox compensatory fiscal policy probably enjoys the greatest repute among economists. Yet it is the
only one which has never really been put into practice. Neither
democratic nor autocratic governments appear to be able to do what
the policy requires.
The reason is fairly obvious. Spending is always popular. It has
proved easy to increase spending in depression periods, but difficult
to reduce spending with the return of prosperity and to maintain
taxes simply for the purpose of debt reduction. A fiscal surplus
invites increased spending. There are always so many more useful
things to do than to reduce the public debt. Compensatory fiscal
policy may be theoretically correct, but there is as yet no evidence
that it can be translated into action.
A survey of the history of fiscal policy in the United States shows
that only the first, third, and fourth sets of objectives have really
been operative in the United States.
THE PERIOD OF FISCAL ORTHODOXY

From 1789 until the passage of the 16th Amendment in 1913,
fiscal policy at the federal, state, and local levels conformed fairly
well with what we have called "fiscal orthodoxy." From 1913 on,
the influence of the humanitarian welfare concept becomes increasingly evident. Since 1933 there has been a tendency to merge this
concept with the Keynesian concept of budgeting for full employment. In many European countries the public finances until very
recently have been almost completely dominated by this combination of objectives.
The reasons for its long supremacy. The long supremacy of
613

614

FISCAL POLICY

orthodox fiscal policy in the United States was due to a number of
causes. The following by no means exhaust the list:
(1) general acceptance of the political doctrine of federalism;
(2) the unwillingness of the Supreme Court to interpret too
liberally the enumerated powers conferred on the federal
government;
(3) the inability of the Congress to raise through the ordinary
revenues at its disposal the sums needed to finance the large
welfare programs urged upon it by those who believed that
public spending and public taxing should be used to reduce
personal income inequalities;
(4) the inability of the individual states to use their much larger
battery of revenue measures for equalization purposes because of the severity of interstate competition;
(5) the existence of virtually free lands on the frontier which
provided an escape for those who found the going tough in
the more settled areas, and the spirit of rampant individualism which life on the frontier fostered; and
(6) our relative immunity from the costly wars and the preparation for wars that made such heavy demands on so many
other nations.
TABLE 42-1
FEDERAL EXPENDITURES FOR SELECTED YEARS, 1 7 9 0 - 1 9 1 0

(in millions of dollars)

Year

Total

1790
1810
1820
1860
1865
1870
1900
1910

4.3
8.2
18.3
63.1
1297.6
309.7
520.7
693.6

Military Interest
0.6
3.9

7.0
27.9
1144.0
78.4
190.7
313.0

2.3

2.8
5.1
3.2
77.4
129.2
40.2
21.3

Veterans
0.2
0.08
3.21
1.10
16.3
28.3
140.9
160.7

Postal Civil
Indian Defi&
Affairs
cit
Misc.
0.03
0.2
0.3
2.9

5.1
3.4
10.2
18.5

9.9
0.3
4.8

7.2
8.5

1.1
1.1
2.6
18.1
44.5
64.4
131.7
171.6

Per
Capita
1.10
1.14

1.91
2.00
39.00*
7.78
6.85
7.54

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States. 1789-1945 Series P-99 (Bureau of
the Census, 1949).
* Estimated on assumption of a population of a little over 33 million. The other per
capita figures are calculated from the population figures for the Continental United
States as shown in Series B-2 (Bureau of the Census).

615

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

These forces combined to keep public spending quite modest in
terms of our rapidly growing population and our mounting national
income.
The growth of public expenditures: Federal. Table 42-1 shows

the growth of federal expenditures by major functions for selected
years.
Federal expenditures increased some 173 fold. During this same
time, however, the population and the wealth of the country were
also increasing. The periods of exceptionally rapid growth were
periods of war and inflation.
The population increase of the period was about 25 fold. Hence
the per capita increase was about 7 fold, much less, but still a substantial increase.
The corrections which must be made for changes in the value of
the dollar are shown in Fig. 42-1.
Year

1913=100

1791
1810
1814
1820
1860
1865
1870
1894
1900
1910

63.6
94.5
127.0
75.6
71.0
127.0
102.0
71.0
79.0
97.0
1790

1810

1830 1850

1870 1890

1910

FIG. 42-1

The two big price increases of this period were due to wars. After
each big increase, the expansion of production and the growing
volume of transactions pressing on an inelastic money supply, forced
a slow secular decline in the price level. The federal government
had neither the means nor the disposition to try to stabilize the
general price level.1
The increase in federal spending becomes still more nominal
when it is related to the growth in the national income. Unfortunately our knowledge of the national income for most of the
period is exceedingly scant. The National Industrial Conference
Board's estimate of realized private production income is close
enough to net national income for our purposes. Table 42-2 shows
i The hostility to the Second Bank of the United States during the 1830s and the
Greenback and Free Silver movements after the Civil War were both reactions to these
long price declines. (See Chapter 24.)

616

FISCAL POLICY

this figure for the years as near those in Table 42-1 as are available,
the federal expenditures for the same years, and the ratio of federal
expenditures to realized private production income.
TABLE

42-2

FEDERAL SPENDING RELATED TO NATIONAL INCOME

(millions of dollars)

Year

(1)
Private Production
Income

(2)
Federal
Expenditures

1799
1819
1859
1869
1900
1910

688
855
4,098
6,288
14,550
25,569

21.5
69.1
322.9
520.9
693.6

Ratio %

(2)^(1)

9.7

1.5
2.5
1.7
5.1
3.5
2.7

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945, (Series A-154).

The burden of federal expenditures, expressed as a ratio of federal
expenditures to realized private production income, showed surprisingly little change. The three-fold increase between 1859 and
1869 reflects the cost of the War Between the States. Thereafter the
burden fell steadily. It was not difficult for the federal government
to discharge its limited functions with the revenue measures at its
disposal.
Federal revenue. Throughout this period customs duties were the
mainstay of federal finance. Revenues from the sales of public
lands were relatively important up to 1820; thereafter they continued to grow absolutely, but rapidly lost importance as a major
source of revenue. During the War Between the States and for a
short time thereafter the federal government derived some revenues
from a short-lived income tax. An attempt to reintroduce such a
tax during the second administration of Grover Cleveland was defeated by an adverse Supreme Court decision. Consequently the
government had to depend increasingly on a few so-called excise
taxes on articles of mass consumption like tobacco and intoxicating
liquors. The receipts from these excises appear in the last column
of Table 42-3.
State and local expenditures. We do not have detailed year-byyear figures for the states and their local units of government com-

617

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY
TABLE 42-3

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES: TREASURY RECEIPTS FOR SELECTED YEARS

(in millions of dollars)

Year

Total

Customs

1790
1810
1820
1860
1865
1870
1900
1910

4.4
9.4
17.9
56.1
333.7

4.4
8.6
15.0
53.2
84.9
194.5
233.2
333.7

411.3
567.2

675.5

Income and
Profits
Taxes

Sale of
Public
Lands

Others

_

__

0.7

0.1

1.6
1.8
1.0
3.4
2.8
6.4

1.3
1.1

—
—
61.0
37.8
—

21.0

186.8
175.6
331.2
314.4

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945, (Series P-89).

parable to those of the federal government. Table 42-4 shows state
and local expenditures for 1890 and 1913 and their magnitude relative to federal expenditures.
TABLE

42-4

FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL EXPENDITURES, 1 8 9 0 AND 1 9 1 3

As Percent Total
Expenditures

In Millions of Dollars
Year

Federal

State

Local

Total

Federal

State

Local

1890
1913

318.0
725.0

63
229

415
936

796
1890

40
38

8
13

52
49

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945, (Series P-99 and P-202).

As late as 1913 the people still looked primarily to local governments for such services as they felt could best be performed by
compulsory collective action. The federal proportion declined by
2 percentage points. Local governments lost 3 percentage points.
The state governments were becoming more important, but they
were still overshadowed by both the federal government and the
local units of government.
The principal functions performed by the states and their political
subdivisions during this period are shown in Table 42-5.

618

FISCAL POLICY
TABLE 4 2 - 5

STATE AND LOCAL EXPENDITUKES * BY MAJOR FUNCTIONS, 1 8 9 0 AND 1 9 1 3

Functions

General Control
Public Safety
Highways
Sanitation & Health
Hospitals, Public
Welfare, Corrections
Schools
Miscellaneous
Totals

State
1890
1913
(Millions
of Dollars)

Local
1890
1913
(Millions
of Dollars)

21

40

3

n.a.
n.a.

25
14
6

61
40
84
3

22

87

6
11

50
7
229

~63

171
156
143
63

30
139
58

281

415

936

71
51

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945, (Series P-202-211).
* These figures exclude interest charges and capital outlays. They reflect the normal
operating costs of state and local government.

The two main responsibilities of the state governments in both
periods were the general control and the maintenance of state hospitals, correctional institutions, and certain welfare measures. The
people relied largely on their local governments for public education, the building and maintenance of roads, fire protection, public
sanitation, and the maintenance of law and order.
The general-property tax. Throughout this period the states and
their local subdivisions raised most of their revenues through a
locally administered tax on the property holdings of individuals and
business firms. Local officials "assessed" (i.e., determined the
market value of) the wealth of the taxpayer. The local lawmakers
then levied a tax on this assessed wealth sufficient for their needs.
Higher units of government then levied on the same "base."
The total tax paid by an individual was thus the sum of these
local and state "rates." The primary assessment, however, was made
by a local unit of government.
The property which the assessors tried to value consisted of real
estate—land and the improvements permanently attached to the
land—tangibles, and intangibles. A merchant's stock in trade was
a tangible; mortgages, stocks, bonds, promissory notes, bank deposits, etc., were intangibles. Until quite late in the period here
under consideration real estate, tangibles and intangibles were all

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

619

treated alike. In general, tangibles and real estate were taxed where
located; intangibles at the residence of the owner.
The breakdown of the tax. For the first 75 years of our history
this tax worked fairly well, But after the War Between the States,
and beginning first in the industrial and commercial states of the
eastern seaboard, the rise in the rate revealed serious shortcomings
in the tax. These shortcomings were due primarily to changes in
the composition of the assets of the taxpayers. Wages and salaries
were not subject to the tax. Wealthy individuals and business firms
tended to have more and more of their assets in the form of intangibles, stocks, bonds, mortgages, and promissory notes, etc. These
intangibles represented claims on the incomes of individuals and
firms, incomes derived in large part from properties that had already
been taxed. The result was serious and unjustifiable double taxation.
For example, in period 1 Jones owns a house worth $10,000, free
and clear of encumbrances. This $10,000 is on the tax rolls, no more
and no less. In period 2 Jones, confronted with a heavy hospital
bill, borrows $5,000 from Smith at 5 percent interest and gives him
his promise to pay secured by a 10-year mortgage on the house. In
period 2 Jones' house is still down on the rolls at $10,000 and Smith
is now liable for $5,000 on his intangible, Jones* promissory note.
Thus at the end of period 2 $15,000 worth of property is spread on
the rolls, $5,000 of which is fictitious in the sense that the asset
which gives value to the intangible, the note, is already on the rolls
and assessed at its full market value. Corporate bonds and stocks
similarly represent claims on the real and tangible property of corporations.
As situations like this multipled and as the rate increased, intangibles progressively disappeared from the tax rolls. Efforts to
enforce the law led individuals and business firms to locate in socalled "tax-dodgers' retreats" (communities) where the officials
contented themselves with token declarations of intangibles. To
protect their own tax yields, the states were forced to intervene to
secure uniformity in the local assessment of property. The establishment of State Boards of Equalization or State Tax Commissions
improved local assessment practices without, however, overcoming
the inherent defects in the tax.
An appraisal of the tax. By the end of the period here under review competitive undervaluation had become the rule rather than
the exception. Several unfortunate results followed. (1) First of
all, the rate had to be increased to offset the decline in property
valuations. As a result the rate on intangibles became out and out

620

FISCAL POLICY

confiscatory. A $50-per-$ 1,000 rate applied to a $1,000 bond bearing 5 percent interest represented a 100 percent income tax. This
situation speeded the disappearance of intangibles from the tax
rolls. Officials were forced to close their eyes to flagrantly false
declarations and honest citizens were forced to sign their names
to statements which they knew to be false. (2) Fractional valuations made it much more difficult for a taxpayer to know whether
he was being asked to pay relatively more or less than taxpayers of
equal ability. (3) It placed enormous discretionary power in the
hands of the political party which controlled the local assessment
machinery. Let a man of wealth fight the political machine or refuse to make a generous contribution to its campaign funds and he
might find that at the next assessment period the valuation of his
assets for tax purposes had been marked up substantially. As long
as the valuations were under the fair market values called for by the
law, there was very little he could do about it. (4) Finally the
burden of the general-property tax came to rest almost entirely on
real estate and in a fashion that was conducive to bad land utilization 2 because of its effects on land in zones that are in transition
between a less and a more intensive use.
In 1910 a distinguished student of public finance, Professor C. J.
Bullock of Harvard University, had this to say of the generalproperty tax:
The United States has the most crude, inequitable and unsatisfactory
system of local taxation—if, indeed, we can call system that which more
resembles chaos—than can be found in any important country in the
civilized world.3

Toward the end of this period the states increasingly turned the
general-property tax over to the localities and developed new
sources of revenue: special taxes on corporations, on business earnings, taxes on selected commodities (cigarettes, liquor, cigars, etc.)
plus a variety of occupational fees and license charges. Many states
exempted intangibles from the general-property tax and made them
liable to a small annual state tax. Others continued to rely on the
2
See John V. Van Sickle "Classification of Land for Taxation," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Nov. 1927, pp. 95-104. Also Alvin H. Hansen and Harvey S. PerlofR
State and Local Finance in the National Economy, W. W. Norton & Co., New York:
1944, pp. 274-283.
3
The article from which this quotation is taken was written in 1910. It is reproduced
in Professor Bullock's Selected Readings in Public Finance (Ginn & Co.) 2nd ed., p. 289.
A decade later a South Carolina study likened the administration of the tax in that state
to "the gentle art of cracking safes
"

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

621

tax but modified it by requiring that intangibles should be valued
at a lower percent of their true market value than tangibles, and
that these in turn should be valued at a lower percentage of their
market values than real estate; or alternatively they maintained the
principle of uniform valuation but provided for lower rates applicable to tangibles and intangibles. Thus modified, the tax is called a
"classified property tax."
Despite these changes the tax is still the mainstay of most local
governments and most of the objections raised above are still valid.
Public debt. The federal government started out with a relatively
heavy debt as a result of taking over the debts that the states contracted during the War of Independence against England. This
debt, plus that incurred during the War of 1812, was wiped out by
1836. The War Between the States, the Spanish-American War,
and the costs of constructing the Panama Canal led to new debt,
which was always reduced by succeeding administrations. Table
42-6 shows the significant changes in the debt that occurred during
the first 120 years. (These changes in the debt are not examples
of compensatory fiscal policy.)
TABLE

42-6

THE FEDERAL DEBT, SELECTED YEARS, 1 7 9 1 - 1 9 1 0

(in millions of dollars)
Year

Gross Dept

1791
1812
1818
1836
1860
1866
1893
1910

75.5
45.2
103.5
64.8
2,755.8
961.4
1,146.9

Per Capita Debt

2.06
75.42
14.36
12.41

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945, (Series P-132, 133).

The story of the state and local debt is less placid, more varied,
and more difficult to summarize. In contrast with the federal debt,
which was almost entirely the heritage of war, state and local debt
was incurred largely for internal improvements, public buildings,
and, toward the end of the period, the construction or purchase by
municipalities of local utilities. There were two mild epidemics of

622

FISCAL POLICY

debt repudiation—one before and one after the War Between the
States. The earlier defaults were primarily the result of overambitious internal improvement projects by states that were eager to
open their territories to settlement. The second was largely concentrated in the Old South where corrupt carpet-bag governments
enriched themselves and further impoverished the defeated states
by ill-considered or fraudulent public improvement programs. Foreign investors, particularly British investors, lost heavily. British
financial circles never forgot that our federal government refused
to honor their claims and at the same time denied to them the
right to sue the defaulting states in our courts. This episode may
have helped British public opinion reconcile itself to the much
larger counter-repudiation of the British government's debt to our
government which was incurred during World War I.
Between 1890 and 1913 the gross debt of the states and their
localities rose from $1,137 million to $3,822 million, the latter figure
being almost exactly twice the federal government public debt. In
the next 40 years state and local debt was to increase some six-fold
but was to sink to less than 10 percent of the federal debt.
An over-all appraisal of fiscal orthodoxy. We are now in a position to make an over-all appraisal of the effects of the fiscal policy
of this long period. Federal expenditures were small measured
against the national income and were largely due to wars and the
preparation for possible wars. State expenditures absorbed even
less of the national income. The big spending units were the local
governments. Most of the spending served to create an environment highly favorable to business expansion. Federal revenues
were derived almost entirely from customs duties and a few excise
taxes on articles of mass consumption. The general-property tax
was productive but inexcusably inequitable. By a process of accommodation impossible to defend on ethical grounds, it was administered in a way that served the needs of business and permitted
the local tax assessors to get from property owners a contribution
that satisfied the prevailing sense of equity.
The revenue system as a whole was highly regressive. Lowincome groups paid relatively more than the well-to-do. From the
static point of view the system was indefensible. From a dynamic
point of view, however, the system was highly favorable to material
progress and a rising level of living. Capital, the factor of production which was relatively scarce, was given preferred treatment.
As a result, the rate of capital formation exceeded the very high
rate of population increase. The inflow of foreign capital was sub-

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

623

stantial. It received the same treatment as domestic capital, and
no restrictions were placed on the repatriation of either the earnings
or the principal. Despite recurrent setbacks the level of living rose
almost without interruption from decade to decade.
Many factors contributed to this result—the vastness of the American domestic market and the abundance of natural resources
were certainly of great importance—but overshadowing all else was
the fact that private property and private enterprise were respected,
and, to an unprecedented extent, material incentives were given
free play.
FISCAL POLICY 1910 TO DATE

A new fiscal era began with the passage of the 16th Amendment
authorizing the federal government to impose a direct income tax.
Few realized at the time how powerful the new instrument was,
both as a revenue raiser and a modifier of the personal distribution
of incomes. The degree of progression in the first act was indeed
very moderate—7 percent was the maximum rate applicable on a
few large incomes.
How the tax might have developed had we not become involved
in the first World War can never be known. We did enter the war;
federal expenditures soared and public opinion demanded that the
federal tax system should be revised to make it more productive
and to take the profits out of war. By 1919 the 7 percent top rate
had been raised to 77 percent, applicable on a taxable income in
excess of $1,000,000.
The growth of public expenditures. Between 1913 and 1952
federal, state and local expenditures increased more than 50 fold.
As in the preceding period allowance must be made for changes
in the purchasing power of the dollar, for population growth, and
for growth of the national income. The consumers' price index of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics rose from 70.7 to 189.8, a 2.7-fold
increase. The population of the Continental United States increased by almost 60 percent, from 97 to 157 millions. The increase
in "realized private production income/' which was used to measure the growth of the national income during the preceding period,
more than doubled between 1913 and 1929. From 1929 on we have
the more accurate figure of the gross national product and its components. The gross national product rose from $103.8 billion in 1929
to $346.3 billion in 1952, a more than 3-fold increase. At the end
of the period, total federal, state and local spending in the amount

624

FISCAL POLICY

of $101.5 billion amounted to almost 30 percent of the gross national
product and more than 34 percent of the national income.
Table 42-7 shows this growth in public expenditures and also the
shift in the relative importance of the expenditures of the three
TABLE

42-7

FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL EXPENDITURES, 1 9 1 3 AND 1 9 5 2

As Percent Total
Expenditures

In Millions of Dollars
Year

Federal

State

Local

Total

1913
1952

725.0
70.6

229.0
10.8

936.0
20.1

1,890
101.5

Federal State
38
69

Local

13
12

49
19

Source: Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of Nov. 2,1953).

levels of government. Federal expenditures had increased almost
100-fold, state expenditures approximately 50-fold, and local expenditures a trifle over 20-fold.
Federal expenditures. The disproportionate growth of federal
TABLE 42-8
FEDERAL EXPENDITURES BY MAJOR FUNCTIONS, SELECTED YEARS

ending
June 30

Per
Capita
(to
Civil & nearest
Total Military Interest Veterans Indians Misc. dollar)

1911-1915
1916-1920
1926-1930
1936-1940
1945
1948
1951
1953 f

333
720
8,065 4,095
3,183
745
1,348
8,267
98,703 80,537
33,791 11,983
44,633 20,822
70,568 39,990

Year Aver-

Expenditures in millions of dollars

23
375
738
905
3,617
5,211
5,613
5,853

165
187
224
409
772
2,080
2,428

21
31
38

37
30
41
*
*

179
3,377
1,439
5,569
13,747
14,476
18,199
22,297

7
76
26
64
700
230
308
450

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1952 (Table No. 357, p. 306).
* Included in civil and miscellaneous.
f Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of
Nov. 2,1953).

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

625

expenditures was due primarily to war and the preparation for war.
Table 42-8, showing the growth of federal expenditures by major
functions for selected years, brings out this fact very clearly. In the
last year of World War II $80.5 billion in a total budget of $98.7
billion represented military expenditures. In 1952, $48.3 billion or
68 percent of the total budget was devoted to defense, interest on
the national debt (almost entirely a heritage of past wars), and
payments to veterans. But within the "civilian" sector of the budget,
involving expenditures of $22.3 billion, are to be found expenditures
which were virtually unknown at the beginning of this perioddirect money payments to special groups whose income was regarded as socially insufficient. Table 42-9 reveals the magnitude of
these disbursements.
TABLE 42-9
PUBLIC EXPENDITURES FOR ASSISTANCE AND SUBSIDIES BY
MAJOR PROGRAMS, 1 9 5 2

(in millions)

Programs
Total

International assistance
Education (largely veterans'
educational benefits)
Public welfare (largely
public assistance)
Natural resources (largely
agricultural benefits)
Veterans pensions, bonuses and
other noneducational benefits.
All other

All Goverments

Federal

State and
Local

$8,387

$5,916

$2,471

1,224

1,224

1,197

1,172

25

2,276

11

2,265

407

406

2

2,410
873

2,282
821

128
51

Source: Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of Nov. 2, 1953, p. 10).

These disbursements indicate how important government has become as an agency for redistributing the national income.
State and local expenditures. In 1952 the expenditures of the
states and their political subdivisions amounted to $31 billion, approximately the same as the nonmilitary expenditures of the federal
government. Two-thirds of the spending was by local units of
government, one-third by the states. Table 42-10 shows the major

626

FISCAL POLICY
TABLE 42-10
STATE AND LOCAL EXPENDITURES BY MAJOR FUNCTIONS, 1 9 5 2

(in millions)
Functions

Total

State

Local

Direct expenditures, total
Education
•.
Highways
Police and fire protection
Public welfare
Health, hospitals, sanitation, housing.
Public business enterprises
Insurance-Trust expenses
General control
Interest on general debt
Other

$30,884
8,318
4,650
1,525
2,788
3,946
3,087
1,698
1,193
552
3,127

$10,790
1,494
2,556
106
1,410
1,136
723
1,413
361
144
1,447

$20,094
6,824
2,094
1,419
1,378
2,810
2,364
285
832
408
1,680

Source: Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of Nov. 2,1953, Table 5).

purposes for which the two local levels of government spent the
taxpayers' money.
It is apparent from Table 42-10 that the big expenditures of the
states are for highways, education, public welfare and payments
into employee retirement systems and federal unemployment compensation trust funds. The payroll deductions under the federal
unemployment compensation program meet the last item. The $723
million opposite the public business enterprises item represents the
cost of running liquor stores in states which have converted this
business into a fiscal monopoly. In general these states make a profit
from this business which appears on the revenue side of their
budgets.
For the localities the big items of expense are education, highways, police and fire protection, health, hospitals, sanitation, housing and public welfare. Against their expenditures of $2,364 million
for publicly conducted businesses they secure local revenues from
the sale of water, gas, electricity and local transportation.
The public debt. During this period the gross federal debt rose
more than 260-fold, from $1,194 million in 1912 to $269,422 million
in 1946. After a small fall in the period between the end of the war
in Japan and the outbreak of hostilities in Korea, it again began to
rise and stood at $259 billion at the end of fiscal 1952. Furthermore

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

627

the composition and the holding of the debt changed. Today it is
predominantly represented by debt of very early maturities and a
substantial portion is held by our commercial banks and by institutional holders (insurance companies, business firms, etc.) who treat
it as near money. This new method of borrowing to finance the
most costly war in our history with a 2 percent interest rate was at
the cost of a serious price inflation. Another point to note in this
connection is the idea that a domestic debt is not a burden and that
debt reduction should only be undertaken when inflation threatens.
This new view foreshadows the existence of a heavy debt for many
years to come and a delicate problem of debt management into
which it is not necessary to go further at this point in view of what
was said in Chapters 23 and 24.
The rise in state and local debt has been much less spectacular.
By 1941 the debt had risen to $20.2 billion from $4.5 billion in 1912,
after which it fell to just under $16 billion in 1946 as the federal
government preempted the money market and the states and their
localities put off their normal construction programs to release resources for the war effort. Thereafter the growth was rapid. At the
end of 1952 it stood at $30 billion, with cities and school districts
responsible for approximately one-half the total.4
Intergovernmental expenditures. Not only have public expenditures grown relative to population and to the national income but
there has been a marked shift in the responsibility for raising the
vast sums which now pass through the public sector of the economy. The very magnitude of the task made it inevitable that the
federal and state governments should assume more of the responsibility. Small taxing areas like counties, towns, and cities cannot
tax mobile wealth and income very heavily without driving them
out of their jurisdictions. Heavy taxes must be reasonably uniform
in their impact over wide areas. The federal government and the
state governments possess a comparative advantage as revenue
raisers, while local governments still possess a comparative advantage as administrators of many public functions. This fact has given
rise to a system of revenue sharing which has permitted the states
and still more their local political subdivisions to administer functions which they are no longer able to finance by levies on the
private resources (income and properties) located within their
jurisdictions. In 1952 more than $8 billion were transferred from
4
The figures for federal, state and local debt are from Summary of Governmental
Finances (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of Nov. 2, 1953, Table 8).

628

FISCAL POLICY

higher to lower units of government to support activities regarded
as affected with a national or a state-wide interest.
Two primary methods 5 are used to effect this transfer—grantsin-aid and tax sharing. The superiority of the grant-in-aid method,
from the point of view of the receiving government, is its certainty.
It is protected against the inevitable fluctuations in the yield of the
supporting revenue measures.
Both methods of revenue sharing may be neutral in their geographical incidence, or they may be deliberately designed to transfer funds from wealthier communities to poorer communities. The
devices are neutral if they return to the localities roughly the same
amounts as the higher units draw from them through their taxes.
At both the federal and the states level the tendency has been to
use grants and shared taxes for equalization purposes. Social justice,
it is held, requires that individuals pay in accordance with their
abilities and that the government support certain basic public services on the basis of local need.
This is not the place to describe in any detail state revenuesharing devices. The situation varies from state to state. At the
present time the State of Indiana, for example, turns back approximately 40 cents out of every dollar it spends to its local political
subdivisions, primarily for the support of education, public welfare,
and the construction and maintenance of roads and highways.
TABLE 42-11
FEDERAL AIDS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 1 9 5 2

(in millions of dollars)

To
States

Directly
to Local
govts.

Total

Total

2,125

130

2,255

Grants-in-aid
Shared revenue
In-lieu payments

2,092
31
2

120
4
6

2,212
35
8

Item

Source: Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of Nov. 2,1953, p. 12).
5

Payments "in lieu of taxes" represents a form of revenue sharing. The Federal
Government, for example, makes such payments to the localities in the Tennessee
Valley in recognition of the fact that they may not tax the earnings or the installations
of the TVA and that their own tax bases were reduced by the flooding of the rich
bottom lands in their jurisdictions.

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

629

During the period here under review, federal grants-in-aid grew
from almost nothing up to a level at which they represent an important element in the finances of the states and their localities.
The Table 42-11 and Fig. 42-2 reveal the situation in 1952.
The bar charts (Fig. 42-2) show
both the magnitude of federal and
Billions of dollars
0.5
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
state intergovernmental payments
in 1952 and the major purposes for
which these payments were made. Education
Federal grants-in-aid. The grantPublic
in-aid is a device for reconciling Welfare
the political principle of federalism
with the popular demand for the Highways
Federal (to State
use of the taxing and spending
and Local govt's)
power to reduce personal and hence Health &
geographical income inequalities. Hospitals
The reconciliation is an uneasy one.
Natural
The power to tax is the power to Resources
te (to
Local govt's)
control; unless the grantor governAll
ment exercises this control and Others
imposes conditions, the sectional
pressures for larger and larger
FIG. 42-2
grants are likely to get out of hand.
Yet the more detailed the controls, the more likely is it that the people in the different states will be forced to spend their own tax
moneys in ways that do not correspond with their own best judgment as to the most effective use of public funds.
Regional reactions to equalizing federal aid. Public opinion in the
wealthier states is becoming increasingly hostile to the geographical
transfers of capital involved in the federal aid programs.6 Instead
6
A picturesque expression of this reaction is to be found in the much-quoted House
Concurrent Resolution No. 2 of the 85th General Assembly of the State of Indiana which
was passed in 1947. It reads as follows:
Indiana needs no guardian and intends to have none. We Hoosiers—like the people
of our sister states—were fooled for quite a spell with the magician's trick that a dollar
taxed out of our pockets and sent to Washington, will be bigger when it comes back
to us. We have taken a good look at said dollar. We find that it lost weight in its
journey to Washington and back. The political brokerage of the bureaucrats has been
deducted. We have decided that there is no such thing as "federal" aid. We know
that there is no wealth to tax that is not already within the boundaries of the 48 states.
So we propose henceforward to tax ourselves and take care of ourselves. We are
fed up with subsidies, doles and paternalism. We are no one's stepchild. We have
grown up. We serve notice that we will resist Washington, D. C, adopting us.
Be it resolved by The House of Representatives of The General Assembly of the
State of Indiana, The Senate concurring: That we respectfully petition and urge

630

FISCAL POLICY

of a pressure for reduction in federal aid, however, which would
seem to be the natural reaction, the tendency appears to be to insist
that the attendant power to control shall be used to impose on the
poorer states labor and social standards which will reduce their
ability to attract private risk-capital. Thus a prominent Harvard
economist who has become alarmed at the inability of Massachusetts
and Rhode Island to maintain their relative income positions among
the states argues that the elected officials of these two states should
attempt to get a larger share of the federal dollars and that the
federal government should be more actively concerned with the
establishment of "uniform standards of hours, working conditions,
social security, minimum wages, and in so far as possible, equitable
(state and local) taxation among business, labor and agriculture."7
Elsewhere he states flatly that the Massachusetts system of taxation,
which places the burden primarily on property and business and
spares the consumer, should be regarded as the model to be followed
by the other states, particularly those in the South which rely heavily
on sales and other taxes which spare business and burden consumers.8
In view of the relative scarcity of capital which still prevails in
the Old South, the policy of taxing it lightly seems quite logical
from the point of view of the people of the region. If the rate of
development of the region does impose difficult problems of adjustment on older industrial regions, it would seem more consistent with
the operating requirements of a private enterprise system to advocate the abandonment of the equalizing principle in the federal
grant-in-aid programs and a reduction in the volume of federal aid.
The industrial development of the South and the Southwest has
now reached a point where the equalizing principle has lost whatever justification it may have possessed a generation ago, provided
the people there are not denied the opportunity to attract extraIndiana's Congressmen and Senators to vote to fetch our county court house and city
halls back from Pennsylvania Avenue. We want government to come home. Resolved,
further, that we call upon the legislatures of our sister states and on good citizens
everywhere who believe in the basic principles of Lincoln and Jefferson to join with
us, and we with them to restore the American Republic and our 48 states to the
foundations built by our fathers.
In support of this thesis the Indiana State Chamber of Commerce publishes, from time
to time, estimates of the net drain of wealth from the state as a result of federal grantsin-aid. In November 1953, it estimated that Indiana's share of the cost of federal aid
for the fiscal year 1951-52 amounted to $63.5 million and that it received only $31.6
million—a net drain of $31.9 million.
7
Seymour E. Harris, The Economics of New England: A Case Study of an Older
Region, Harvard University Press, Cambridge: 1952 p. 304.
8 Ibid., p. 22.

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

631

regional venture capital which competitive market forces automatically provide.
Changes in state and local revenues. The changes in the methods
of raising revenues at the state and local levels can be disposed of
very briefly. The localities are still primarily dependent on the general property tax. In most states it has become a tax on real estate
and tangibles. It is a reliable source of income, but it is still open
to most of the objections cited earlier. The balance of the locally
raised revenues come from business license charges, occupational
taxes, taxes on gross receipts, franchise taxes on utilities, license
fees on meters and telephone sales, poll and gasoline taxes, motor
vehicle licenses, inspection and highway privilege fees, special assessments, parking meter charges, and the earnings of publicly owned
utilities. More and more of their total disbursements come from
their state governments through grants-in-aid or shares in stateadministered, taxes.
The state governments have largely abandoned the generalproperty tax to their political subdivisions. They now rely on taxes
on intangibles, moderately progressive personal income taxes, corporate income taxes, flat gross income taxes, selective and general
sales taxes, motor vehicle taxes, registration and driver license fees,
gasoline taxes, inheritance taxes, and ear-marked social security
taxes. By and large these levies are regressive in their incidence,
but it should be borne in mind that many of the expenditures are
progessive in their incidence, in the sense that they benefit disproportionately persons of low and moderate incomes.
Changes in federal revenues. The dramatic change in federal
taxation in this period has been the shift from predominantly regressive to predominantly progressive taxes. In 1952 ordinary internal revenue collections were derived from the following sources
and in the following proportions:
PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL GENERAL REVENUE BY SOURCES, 1952

Taxes
Individual income
Corporation income
Sales, gross receipts, customs
Death and gift
Licenses, permits, and other
Charges and miscellaneous

89.7
41.9
31.9
14.0
1.2
0.7
10.3

Source: Summary of Governmental Finances in 1952 (U.S. Dept. of Commerce Release of November 2,1952, Table 3).

632

FISCAL POLICY

At the beginning of the period federal revenues were derived
almost entirely from taxes on sales, gross receipts and customs.
Today these indirect and regressive taxes account for less than oneseventh of the government's general revenues. Taxes on individual
and corporate income and on bequests (death duties and gift taxes)
provide three-quarters of the general revenues. If, as many economists hold, the tax on corporate income cannot be shifted onto
consumers through higher prices or onto employees through lower
wages, then it rests on dividends. In that event, it is apparent that
the federal revenue system has become a powerful instrument for
redistributing the national income in favor of the lower income
groups in society. The increase in federal welfare expenditures
reinforces this egalitarian trend.
In the remainder of this chapter we propose to describe in some
detail these three taxes on personal incomes, on corporate incomes,
and on bequests and consider their effects upon the. performance
of a predominantly private enterprise economy.
THE FEDERAL PERSONAL INCOME TAX
The direct taxation of personal incomes started very modestly
with a one percent normal tax and a progressive surtax which rose
from one percent on an income of $20,000 and less than $50,000 to
a maximum of 6 percent on the fraction of a person's income in
excess of $500,000. Later the two rates were merged into a single
schedule.
The definition of net taxable income has gone through many
changes. For our purposes it suffices to note that from the beginning it has been defined very roughly as gross income (including
capital gains, i.e., profits realized from the sale of assets like real
estate, stocks, and bonds) less (a) expenses incurred in earning the
income (including statutory allowances for amortization, depreciation, and depletion of durable assets), (b) tax-exempt income
(originally the salaries of all federal, state and local officeholders
and the interest on all public bonds, now only the interest on state
and local bonds), (c) a personal exemption and an exemption for
dependents. These last two exemptions were dictated by administrative considerations (the very high cost of collecting a very small
tax from a very large number of persons with low incomes), political expediency, and the prevailing concept of social justice, which
held that there was a minimum income which could not be taxed
without forcing individuals into the dependency class. An addi-

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

633

tional and valid consideration was the fact that low-income groups
were already relatively overburdened as a result of the regressivity
of the total federal, state, and local tax system.
Evolution of the personal income tax. With our entry into World
War I the personal exemptions were reduced and the progression
was sharply increased, reaching a high of 77 percent in 1918. During the 1920s the personal exemptions were increased and the progression stopped with a maximum marginal rate of 20 percent.
During the 1930s the progression was again made very steep. The
purpose was not so much to raise revenue as to effect a redistribution of personal incomes. It was during this period that the
Keynesian reasoning regarding the adverse employment effects of
large income inequalities came to the support of the more traditional "social justice" reasoning. World War II, like the preceding
war, created an irresistible and proper demand for a further advance in the rates. Rates were reduced after the termination of
hostilities, but much less than after the first war. The Korean war
led to a further sharpening of the progression. The maximum rate
at the present writing is 92 percent applicable on a taxable income
in excess of $200,000 for a single person or $300,000 for the head of
a household.
Table 42-12 shows the variation in average rate for selected income groups for selected years.
TABLE 42-12
AVERAGE RATES FOR SELECTED INCOME GROUPS FOR SELECTED YEARS

Married Person with 2 Dependents with Net Income

Income
Year

$3,000

$10,000

$25,000

$50,000

$100,000

1914
1918
1929
1940
1944-5
1951

1.2
—
—
9.2
4.1

0.6
7.8
0.4
4.4
22.5
16.2

1.0
14.7
3.4
14.3
38.8
25.6

2.5
35.0
14.8
42.9
68.6
52.6

5.0
64.6
22.8
65.9
88.6
80.7

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1952, Table No. 367.

The average rate understates the impact of the tax on the decisions of income taxpayers. What counts is the marginal rate, i.e.,
the rate payable on an added dollar earned. Thus under the rates

634

FISCAL POLICY

applicable to incomes earned in 1952 the average and marginal rate
for single persons with selected taxable incomes are shown below:
Taxable Income

Average Rate

Marginal Rate

$ 9,000
13,000
17,000
27,000
51,000
101,000

28.6
32.9
37.4
47.0
58.4
70.4

38
48
56
67
77
90

Rates such as these undoubtedly change men's attitudes toward
work and leisure, risk-taking and security, not to mention their
ability to save and assume risks. The impact is particularly marked
on those whose services are most important as the organizers, directors of production, and the providers of the savings needed for the
financing of new business ventures.
THE CORPORATION INCOME TAX
The corporation income tax has been increased almost as much
as the personal income tax, and the principle of progression has
been introduced to a modest degree. The original flat one percent
tax has now become a flat 30 percent tax on net earnings and in
addition there is a 22 percent surtax on all income in excess of
$25,000. (During both world wars and the Korean war, corporations were also liable to an excess profits tax on earnings in excess of
those of a base period or in excess of a stated rate of return.)
Not only has the corporation tax been sharply increased, but
since 1936, the dividends are fully taxable again when distributed
to individuals at the rates determined by their total taxable incomes.
The result is a very heavy and discriminatory treatment of income
derived from investment in new corporate ventures. For persons of
wealth the purchase of new issues of tax-exempt state and local
bonds bearing 3 to 4 percent interest is more remunerative than the
purchase of a new issue of stock in a corporation which can earn 4
to 5 times as much before taxes.
The situation is mitigated to some extent by the fact that capital
gains on assets held more than six months can be segregated by the
taxpayer and declared separately. He then has the option of paying a maximum tax of 25 percent, or including them in his normal
income and paying the rate determined by his top bracket income.

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

635

Since the marginal rate of the personal income tax exceeds 25 percent on very modest incomes, most investors elect to take advantage
of the 25 percent capital gains rate, and their investments are largely
determined by their judgments regarding the prospects of realizing
income via the capital gains route.
TAXES ON BEQUESTS
The popular rejection of large personal income inequalities also
finds its reflection in the increasingly heavy charge which all modern governments levy on the right of bequest. These charges may
be placed on the value of the estate of a decedent or upon the value
of the shares going to the individual inheritors. The first type of tax
is called an estate tax; the second an inheritance tax. The term
death duties is used to cover the two. The gift tax is a levy on
gratuitous transfers of property inter vivos (between live persons).
The purpose is to prevent individuals from avoiding the death
duties by distributing their estates during their lifetimes.
Inheritance taxes. The individual states have long levied inheritance taxes. The rates are usually progressive with respect to the
size of the distributed shares and the remoteness of the relationship
to the decedent. The rates have had to be kept relatively moderate
to prevent wealthy individuals from avoiding the tax by taking out
residence in a state with a low set of rates. Even so, differences in
the severity of the tax did cause some shifting of residence for purposes of minimizing the burden until the introduction of the credit
off-set by the federal government in connection with its taxation of
estates. The yield of the state inheritance taxes in recent years
comes to about 3 percent of their total revenue collections.
The federal estate tax. From 1862 through 1871 and again for a
few years around the turn of the century, the federal government
imposed very moderate taxes on inheritances and legacies. Since
1916 it has levied an estate tax. The tax was introduced as a war
measure with sharply progressive rates. Thereafter the sequence of
events was similar to that for the income tax—reductions during the
1920s and large increases during the 1930s and the war years of the
1940s. The tax now ranges from 3 percent of an estate in excess of
$60,000 if the decedent is unmarried to 97 percent on an estate in
excess of $10,000,000. In addition there is a cumulative gift tax
designed to prevent a person from avoiding the tax entirely by
disposing of his wealth during his lifetime.

636

FISCAL POLICY

SOME CONSEQUENCES OF HIGHLY PROGRESSIVE
TAXATION

The triumph of the ability-to-pay principle has had a number of
social and economic consequences that deserve thoughtful consideration.
1. It promotes public extravagance. The first, and in many ways
the most serious, effect of the extreme application of the ability-topay principle is its impact on popular attitudes toward public spending. The majority have come to feel that they do not pay and that
they should not be expected to pay for federal services. This makes
every proposal for additional federal expenditures very attractive to
voters, and every proposal for federal economies very unattractive
to the political representatives of the voters. The typical voter is
becoming more and more like
. . . . the old man in the hurse
Who said, "this isn't so worse,
The ride is immense, likewise the expense,
But it doesn't come out of my purse."
2. The tax system favors existing corporations. The ability-to-pay
principle applies to individuals. The business firm, as such, has no
ability to pay in the sense in which the term is used. It is simply
an agency for producing and selling goods and services and distributing the firm's earnings among those who supply the productive resources. This fact is recognized in the taxation of partnerships
and cooperatives. If it were still recognized in the case of corporations, the effects of progressive federal taxes would not be as adverse
to healthy business expansion as they are at present.
Instead we have the double taxation of distributed earnings to
which reference has already been made. This is not only discriminatory in principle, but, no less serious, it places the managements
of existing and well-established companies in a preferred situation
in the competition for the savings of the public. These managements have access to virtually costless capital which they get
through the plowing back of surpluses. Their decisions do not have
to meet the test of the money market. From the point of view of
many common stockholders, particularly those already enjoying substantial taxable incomes, a relatively unproductive reinvestment of
their undistributed claims promises to yield a larger return, after
taxes, than they could hope to secure from an equivalent and much
more productive investment elsewhere. It is to their advantage to

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

637

allow the managements of these corporations to do the investing for
them. As long as the present double taxation of corporate income
continues, this is probably the price we must pay for business expansion. Relatively little new equity capital is entering the corporate field.9
4. The tax system discriminates against small business. This
bottling up of so large a share of the nation's annual savings within
existing corporations makes unnecessarily difficult the establishment
and growth of small business. The organized capital market is not
open to small business. The launchers of such enterprises must be
able to borrow from friends or from local banks, but before they
can borrow they must be able to show a substantial equity interest.
Such an interest comes into existence only as a result of saving, and
saving is much more difficult than formerly because of the rapid
progression of the personal income tax. The business birth rate is
thus cut down. And simultaneously the death rate of new businesses
is increased because of the heavy taxes imposed on the earnings of
such enterprises. It would be difficult to devise a tax system more
unfavorable to the entry of new firms, with new blood and new
ideas, into the business population than the one under which we
are now operating.
5. The tax system discriminates against the small saver. An individual with a marginal personal income tax liability of 25 percent
has to pay a tax of more than double that amount on his undistributed share of the income from any corporate investments he
may have. He can avoid this heavy tax by investing in real estate
or in unincorporated businesses, but both of these outlets involve
risks which he is ill equipped to evaluate.
If, instead, he buys tax-exempt state and local bonds, he is forced
to compete with the well-to-do who benefit even more than he does
from the exemption privilege. As a result his net return on this
type of investment is driven lower than would otherwise be the
case.
6. The tax system favors government ownership. The exemption
of state and local bonds from federal taxation gives the states and
their localities a preferred position in the competition for the sav9
In 1949, for example, corporations secured $6 through undistributed earnings for
every dollar secured through the sale of common stock—$7.8 billion as against $1.3 billion. Three and one-half times as much new capital was secured through borrowing—
$4.6 billion. Altogether $18.6 billion of the total of $24.5 billion invested by corporations
in that year came from internal sources, with depreciation reserves providing the second
largest contribution. Clay J. Andrews, "Trends in Supply of Equity Capital/' in the
Harvard Business Review, September, 1950, p. 81.

638

FISCAL POLICY

ings of the public. This fact may make a publicly conducted enterprise economical from the point of view of the citizens of a state
because of the saving in the cost of capital. Thus the governor of
one of the states who has been most outspoken in his views regarding the relative inefficiency of publicly conducted business enterprises urges that his state undertake a public power project. In his
testimony before a Senate Committee he admitted quite frankly
that it was the tax situation which led him to urge public ownership:
If all the government-developed waterpower in America paid federal, state
and local taxes, I would not have a leg to stand on. But the government
waterpower in America pays no federal taxes, no state taxes and no local
taxes. . . . Why should my people be singled out of the forty-eight states
to pay10the only taxes there are on this kind of waterpower development?
This review of federal fiscal policy indicates how complete has
been the triumph of the egalitarian—welfare—full-employment point
of view. The equalizing effect has been all the greater because
much more of the spending by all levels of government at present
benefits low-income groups than was the case 15 years ago. Personal income inequalities are still considerable, but they have been
reduced appreciably. The equalizing tendency has been particularly pronounced since 1941. Thus between that date and 1948 the
percent increase in average family income was 25 percent. If
families (including single persons) are arranged in 5 equal groups
according to income, we find that the rate of improvement has
varied inversely to size of income. The average incomes ($893 in
1948) of the poorest one-fifth had increased by 51 percent; that of
the next fifth by 44 percent; that of the third fifth by 31 percent.
The average income of the next to the highest group—those with
an average income of $4711 in 1948 had increased by 23 percent,
2 percentage points less than the average increase. The percentage
increase for the highest group (average 1948 income, $9911) was
18 percent—7 percentage points below the national average.11
Only time will tell whether sufficient individual incentives have
been left to enable the private sector to expand at the rate that
public opinion has come to expect. If not, popular faith in the private enterprise system may be so weakened as to raise justifiable
10
Testimony of Governor Thomas E. Dewey before the Senate Public Works Committee as quoted in The Freeman, November 16, 1953, p. 121.
11 Statistical Abstract of the United States. 1952. Table No. 313. p. 261.

AMERICAN FISCAL POLICY

639

doubts regarding its ability to promote the general welfare. Professor Schumpeter's prediction 12 that socialism is the heir apparent
of capitalism appears to have been based on his conviction that a
democratic people cannot resist the temptation to equalize personal
incomes to a degree that is incompatible with the minimum operating requirements of a vigorous private enterprise system. This
led him to examine the possibilities of a democratic form of socialism. We shall undertake a similar inquiry in the next three chapters.
Questions:
1. Describe the principal methods of raising revenues used by (a)
the federal, (b) the state and (c) the local governments in 1860,
1913, and 1952. Indicate in each case whether the distribution of
the burden was regressive, proportional or progressive.
2. Identify the principal reasons for the long period of "fiscal orthodoxy" in American public finance.
3. Discuss critically the compatibility of federal fiscal policy with the
operating requirements of the private enterprise system in I860,
1913, and 1952.
4. Compare the quantitative growth of federal expenditures over the
period 1789-1913 with that of the 40-year period since 1913. What
developments of the first period can be cited as evidence that the
growth during that period was in a sense "nominal"? Can the same
thing be said of the growth of the next period?
5. Leaving aside military and related expenditures, identify the principal factors responsible for the growth of federal, state and local
expenditures during the last 40 years.
6. Rank the federal, state and local governments from high to low on
the basis of their responsibility for total public expenditures at each
of the following dates: 1890, 1913, and 1952.
7. Distinguish between grants-in-aid and tax-sharing and identify the
forces that appear to have been responsible (a) for the development of these two types of intergovernmental expenditures; and
(b) for the tendency for them to become increasingly equalizing
in character.
8. "Recent developments in federal aid for social security have made it
difficult for the federal government to control its own expenditures."
Argue for or against the validity of this statement.
12

In Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Harper & Bros., New York: 1942.

640

FISCAL POLICY

9. Explain how the federal government created a market for its bonds
during the War Between the States and World War II. Indicate
the relevance of these methods to the behavior of prices during the
periods of peace following each of these wars. (See Chapter 25.)
10. Has there ever been any public debt repudiation in the United
States?
11. Distinguish between a classified-property tax and the general property tax and summarize the defects of the latter tax. What is its
present status?

PART ELEVEN

Alternatives to Capitalism

43
Communism

W U R concern up to this point has
been with the functioning of an ideal capitalistic system and with
its use as a yardstick for determining whether interventions of various sorts are or are not in conformity with its operating requirements. The desirability of maintaining this type of economy was
more or less assumed. In this and the two following chapters, this
assumption will be tested. Perhaps a system which provides for
more conscious and planned direction of individual action may be
superior.
The word "superior" implies a value judgment. Our inquiry must
now go beyond the narrow confines of technical economics. Issues
transcending the production of material goods and services are involved. One of our value judgments was set forth in the first chapter. We said there that the economist as a "scientist" is justified
in assuming that freedom of inquiry is a paramount value and that
any economic system which cannot respect this value is to be regarded as inferior to one that can. Given this basic assumption,
it follows that freedom of speech, of the press, and of assembly are
equally important, since without them freedom of inquiry would be
meaningless. In brief, we regard an economic system that can permit these democratic processes to work as better than one that
must destroy them in order to realize its goals.
The capacity to produce a large and expanding output of goods
and services is a worth-while characteristic of any economic system, but once a system has demonstrated its capacity to provide
for group survival, this material test ceases to hold first place in our
tests of the relative merits of systems. Beyond this point the intangible values that make it possible for the individual to realize
643

644

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

his potentialities and to develop the spiritual side of his being take
precedence.
Our evaluation of the alternatives to private capitalism in this
and the next two chapters will be based on this point of view.
Nonetheless, our appraisal of alternative systems will largely be
concerned with the mundane problems of production—with the allocation of resources, with the freedoms of consumer choice and
job choice, with employment stability and technological progress,
and, most important of all, with the prospects of the peaceful coexistence of national economies based on different operating principles—because of our conviction that the protection of the truly
fundamental values depends to a large extent on the way these
problems are resolved.
It would be interesting to examine past economic systems—such as
feudalism and mercantilism—and those of contemporary primitive
peoples. Our concern here, however, is with the choices confronting
societies which, for better or worse, were drawn into the nexus of 19th
century capitalism and which cannot retreat from the resulting interdependence because of the accompanying growth of population. Any acceptable alternative to capitalism must be able to effect a peaceful integration with other national economies organized on an advanced basis.
We shall also disregard Italian Fascism and German National Socialism
because of their frank and contemptuous rejection of the democratic
processes and their glorification of war. Their objective was subjugation,
not integration. These were warfare, not welfare systems.
Given our criteria, the only real alternatives to capitalism are
communism and socialism. Both of these systems, it is claimed, will
protect the great intangible values of a free society and will satisfy
the material tests of a good economic system, far better than any
private enterprise system.
AN OVER-ALL COMPARISON
Basic similarities. Theory, experience, and common sense tell us
that a complex economy with an elaborate division of labor cannot be made to operate without the use of money. All present-day
socialistic systems use money both as a control device and as a
medium of exchange. Pure communism would have to do the
same.1
i See Trygve J. B. Hoff, Economic Calculation in the Socialist Society (W. Hodge,
London: 1949) for a discussion of the attempts to organize a socialistic system without
using money and of the growing acceptance by socialist theorists of money as a medium
of exchange and a means of control.

COMMUNISM

645

The use of money imposes a certain superficial similarity on all
three models.
(1) Money, or generalized purchasing power, moves from the
citizen-consumers to firms selling final goods and services and from
these firms back to suppliers. The State and every enterprise, public or private, uses money to purchase or hire resources. In the last
analysis, this money is paid to persons and again becomes available
to continue the endless process of producing and consuming. All
economic systems have this primary monetary circuit.
(2) In all three models the economy also provides goods and
services which are either inherently nonvendable or nonvendable
because of a political decision. The general over-all governmental
administration (national defense, the maintenance of domestic law
and order, the support of the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of government) involves services which are inherently
nonvendable. Other services (education, roads, parks, playgrounds,
public health, etc.) could be charged for but may be made freely
available to all or to selected groups of citizens. All of these gratuitous public services make demands on the limited resources of
the economy and involve the spending of money.
The money in the monetary circuit passes eventually into the
hands of individuals and forms part of the potential money demand
for vendable goods and services. In and of itself, the money spending by government is inflationary. In all three models it is necessary,
therefore, to provide a mechanism for drawing off an equivalent
amount of money, if perpetual inflation is to be avoided. Taxes of
one sort or another are required to siphon off this excess purchasing
power.
(3) All three models are equipped with inlets and outlets through
which the money obligations arising from trade with other economic
systems have to pass. Exports bring outside money into the system,
while imports drain money from the system.
(4) Finally, all three models have inlets into the primary monetary circuit to provide for capital formation. The money coming
in through the investment inlet goes to firms making capital goods
and from them to resource owners as disposable income. The immediate effect of this particular money flow is similar to that produced by public expenditures used to provide nonvendable services.
It diverts resources (assuming full employment) from the consumer
goods industries, reduces temporarily the volume of final vendable
goods and services, and increases the monetary demand for this reduced supply. In time, of course, the new capital increases the

646

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

volume of such goods and services. The first effect, however, is
inflationary, unless the investment funds represent money that
would not otherwise have been spent for consumer goods and
services.
In the capitalistic model with a 100 percent gold reserve standard the money passing through the capital formation inlet comes
from real savings and hence reduces the direct return flow of purchasing power at the consumer retailer joint in the circuit. This
diversion eliminates the inflationary effect and hence forces a growing economy to operate with secularly falling prices.
In the capitalistic model with fractional reserve banking, the
banks provide part of the money entering through the investment
inlet. This makes it possible for capital formation to proceed, even
within the straightjacket of an international gold standard, without
any fall in the general level of consumer goods prices, or even to
the accompaniment of slowly rising prices. Fractional reserve banking introduces the possibility of "forced savings." In general, however, the rate of capital formation in the capitalistic models is
determined by the private decisions of the citizens as consumers
and entrepreneurs. An interest rate emerges which equalizes the
amounts which the citizens are willing to save, given their individual rates of time preference, and the amounts the entrepreneurs are
prepared to use, given their profit expectations.
As will appear presently the communist model cannot, and it is
very doubtful whether the socialist model can, generate a spontaneous interest rate capable of determining the flow of money through
the investment pipe line. There is need for a political decision.
Basic differences. Despite these basic similarities, the motors
which drive the systems require very different kinds of fuel. This
is due to the fact that the systems are animated by different concepts of social justice which call for very different distribution
results.
The power generators. In the capitalistic models the primary
power generator is self-interest.2 The citizens as resource owners
strive to put their lands, their capital, and their labor at the disposal of the firms which offer the best terms, and then to spend the
resulting incomes on the goods and services which, in their judgment, will yield the greatest total satisfaction. Their efforts at maximization require that they apportion their incomes between present
and future goods and services in such fashion as to equalize the
2
It is suggested that the reader review at this point the discussion of the meaning
of self-interest in Chapter 3, pp. 33-4.

COMMUNISM

647

marginal utility of the last dollar spent on every type of present
good and the last dollar saved for future consumption.
The managers of firms similarly strive to maximize earnings by
paying as little as possible for resources and charging as much as
possible for their products. Competition, however, forces them to
pay identical prices for resources of equal significance, and these
prices tend to be those that clear the various resource markets.
Competition further induces them to adjust production in the short
run so as to equate marginal cost and marginal revenue.
Thus, in the capitalistic models impersonal forces determine what
things shall be produced, what firms shall be charged with their
production, what resources each firm shall use, what prices it shall
pay for these resources, and where and at what scale it shall produce. The production, distribution, and consumption patterns are
all determined in a fashion which possesses internal consistency and
which in addition tends to harness the powerful drive of self-interest
and hence to minimize the need of political directives.
The power generator in the other two models is supposed to be
"the social interest" or the general interest. Actually, of course, an
important place is reserved for the general interest in a responsible
private enterprise system and, neither in theory nor in practice, is
it possible for the communist and socialist models to dispense entirely with the drive of self-interest. The difference, though a matter
of degree, is so great as to warrant the statement that a basic difference in the models is to be found in their prime power generators.
The distribution formulas. The distribution formula of capitalism
is: From each according to what he can or wants to contribute with
the resources at his disposal; to each according to what he actually
does contribute.
In economies operating according to this formula, there is no
need for a central plan and relatively little need for organized
compulsions. This situation creates an environment extremely
favorable to the principle of liberty. Liberty requires reasonable
freedom of economic choice, and freedom of economic choice precludes detailed physical planning. It obviously cannot flourish in
a system in which individuals are expected to act, day in and day
out, in ways that are contrary to their obvious self-interest. Any
model which fails to utilize this driving force to keep money and
goods moving through the pipe lines of the system must provide
authoritative directives which can easily degenerate into tyranny.
The distribution formula of pure communism is: To each according to his need, from each according to his ability. The driving

648

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

force in such a system must obviously be altruism or compulsion.
Communists and socialists alike recognize the impossibility of
any early realization of this distribution formula. They admit that
man is not yet ready for the change. He has been corrupted by the
capitalistic institutions under which he has lived so long. He must
first go through the socialistic transition system in which he will be
rewarded according to the importance of his work contribution,
and that alone. Land and capital, the instruments of production,
will be socially owned. Their imputed contributions to the social
output will be used to support the administration of the system and
to increase the real incomes of the workers. There will be personal
income inequalities under socialism, but it is expected that they will
be exclusively wage inequalities and hence far less than those prevailing under capitalism. Furthermore, socialist theorists hold that
if the resulting inequality should prove greater than they anticipate,
the socialist State can, like the capitalist State, tax away a portion
of the larger personal incomes and use the proceeds to pay for social
services particularly useful to the lowest-paid workers. Nonetheless
the essential distinction between communism and socialism, as
models, is in their distribution formulas.
When the discussion turns from the realm of ideals to the area
of strategy, it is necessary to make a sharp distinction between the
socialist and the communist. In the West at least, a socialist is one
who cherishes, or at least claims to cherish, so highly the intangible
values which have developed under capitalism 3 that he would not
wittingly sacrifice them even temporarily as the price of accomplishing the overthrow of capitalism. Consequently he advocates a
step-by-step approach to his goal. He insists upon the eventual attainment of socialism by evolutionary and democratic processes.
Each step must be by vote of the people and with compensation for
the private property taken over en route. While agreeing with the
communist that the receipt of income from private property is
wrong because of its distribution effect, he yet holds that it would
be wrong to confiscate the property rights of some while leaving
intact the rights of others.4 The means must justify the end.
The communist, on the other hand, rejects the principle of gradualism and compensation. What is called for is a quick, sharp
3
For a persuasive defense of the thesis that modern capitalism made possible the
communistic and socialist visions, see Joseph A. Schumpeter, Socialism, Capitalism, and
Democracy, Harper & Bros., 3rd edition, New York: 1950.
4
The doctrine of gradualism makes it possible for men who call themselves socialists
to disagree regarding the extent to which private property and private enterprise should
be allowed to operate in a particular country and at a particular time.

COMMUNISM

649

surgical operation—revolution—the confiscation of whatever properties are necessary to the launching of the new system, and the
liquidation of all those whose mentalities are so hopelessly "bourgeois" that they cannot even be useful in the most menial roles.
The end justifies the means. Furthermore communists hold, and
perhaps correctly, that gradualism is not really workable. Once the
bourgeoisie wake up to the fact that their days are numbered the
capitalistic system breaks down. The only merit in the doctrine of
gradualism from the communist point of view is that it hurts production, creates confusion and social discord and hence hastens the
revolution.
However legitimate one's rejection of communist tactics, one
cannot, for that reason, reject the communist ideal. The ideal is
inspiring. It is, to a considerable extent, the ideal that animates
the family. "From each according to his ability, to each according
to his need" is an expression of the highest possible ethical principle, provided the sharing is spontaneous. If it is rejected, it must
be rejected on better grounds than that it inspires fanatics to deeds
of violence that threaten the very foundations of civilization. The
cruelties of the Inquisition did not lead to the rejection of Christianity.
If communism as a model is to be rejected it must be on the
twofold grounds that it is unworkable and that any actual regime
which really attempts to realize the communist ideal will function
progressively worse, the closer it approaches this model.
Any comparison of the actual performances of contemporary
economic systems must take account of many imponderables. The
better performance of the one at a particular time—the American
predominantly private enterprise economy as compared to the
British more socialistic economy in the five post World War II years,
for example—may be due to temporary conditions resulting from
World War II and not to any inherent superiority of its blueprints.
No attempts at such a comparison of actual systems will be attempted here. We shall confine ourselves to an examination of
models and to noting the conditions that have to be satisfied if they
are to perform satisfactorily. It will then be up to the reader to
decide for himself whether the values which he holds to be most
important are more likely to be realized in an economy which uses
ideal capitalism as its model or in one which is based on the ideal
communist model or the ideal socialist model.

650

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

THE COMMUNIST MODEL
Communism is much more than an economic system. It is essentially a religion, and Karl Marx (1818-1883), a German refugee
scholar, is its prophet. Das Kapital is its bible, and the Communist
Manifesto of 1848 is its "ten commandments" to the faithful on the
strategy to be followed for bringing in the millenium.
This is not the place to explain the great appeal of communism or to
evaluate Marx's theory of value or his misuse of the Hegelian dialectic to
prove the inevitability of communism. It may not be out of place to point
out here, however, the practical importance of the Marxian doctrine of
inevitability. It gave heart to the faithful when they were but a handful.
It encouraged the timid to enter the fold. It furnished the fanatic with a
justification for any conceivable deceit, for any act of violence that would
hasten the revolution. If communism is good and its coming is inevitable,
opposition is sinful. Conduct is not to be judged by the "bourgeois"
standards of truth, charity, and tolerance. The only valid test of an act
is whether it advances the cause. The end justifies the means. Only after
the cause has triumphed will the bourgeois virtues again have validity.
Until then they are but snares set to paralyze our wills, to keep us in
chains.
Its fallacious assumptions. There are a number of reasons why
an economy built on the pure communist model would prove unworkable and undesirable.
In the first place the communist distribution formula cannot be
translated into an action program for free men. The needs principle
is only workable within small intimate groups such as a family farm
or a small family business. It is workable there because there is a
"head of the house" whose right to make decisions is recognized
and who is in a position to know what are the reasonable needs of
the members of the household. Where the ties of affection are
strong, no serious problem of enforcement arises.
The needs test. The simple needs test is inapplicable to a society
made up of millions of family units. The needs of each family are
its wants as seen by the head of the household, and the aggregate
of these needs-wants is bound to exceed the productive capacity of
the society as a whole. Wishful thinking cannot abolish the law of
diminishing returns. Nor is there any reason to believe that the assurance of a family income adequate to meet family needs would
solve the population problem. If family income is to be automatically increased with family size, the State will have to regulate the
size of the family.

COMMUNISM

651

The ability test. The ability test is equally unsatisfactory. If an
individual's needs are guaranteed, he cannot be allowed to refuse
every job except that for which he feels that he is best fitted. Labor
is not a homogeneous, undifferentiated factor. It is millions of men
and women possessing a wide range of skills, aptitudes, and interests. How are these qualities to be discovered and how are their
possessors to be induced to use them for the general welfare? One
difficulty is that the possessor of a rare skill may not even know
that he possesses it. In that event the communist society is not likely
to discover it. Hardly less serious is the fact that the possessor of
such a skill may not care to disclose it if the reward assigned to him
is independent of the job. He may prefer to pursue an activity for
which he is less fitted but which he finds more satisfying. This is
his privilege in a capitalistic society where rewards are based on
what he chooses to contribute. In a communist society this could
not be tolerated. If all are to be rewarded according to their needs
within the limits set by the production plan, all are going to have
to accept specific job assignments.
The communist theory of human nature. The ability test rests
on a faulty theory of human nature. Man is neither wholly altruistic
nor wholly selfish. His selfishness is itself admixed with altruism.
Seldom does he seek more just for himself alone. His concern is for
his family, his close neighbors, his lodge, his church, his union, his
community, his state, his nation and, perhaps, for humanity itself.
But the intensity of his concern for other groupings necessarily
diminishes as the groups become larger and more remote. In a moment of exaltation many men are capable of making highly altruistic
decisions that involve the sacrifice of their fortunes and their lives.
Very few, however, are capable of making and renewing hour after
hour, day after day, small prosaic decisions directed at the promotion of anything as vague as the general welfare. Yet this is precisely the kind of altruism communism demands if it is to be
humane and democratic.
But even if this kind of altruism did exist, it would not be enough.
What is the general welfare? Ask a dozen altruists to define it and
you will get a dozen answers. The general welfare has to be authoritatively determined and translated into a detailed program
involving the production of literally hundreds of thousands of different items. And its realization calls for the assignment of men
to jobs.
There is no need to speculate here regarding methods of realizing
this idealistic distribution formula. The practical difficulties will

652

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

become sufficiently evident in our examination of the less ambitious
socialist model. Here it suffices to note that the closer an actual
economy approaches the communist ideal, the more absolute and
ruthless must be the dictatorship. The more fervently and sincerely
the wielders of power believe in the righteousness of the ultimate
goal, the more difficult it is for them to tolerate any conduct that
diverts the economy from the true goal. Altruism itself is not
enough, since a dozen altruists may have a dozen different visions
of the good society. It follows that the area of personal freedom
reserved to the individual cannot be large enough to permit him
to grow in moral stature by being confronted day to day by alternatives and by learning to choose voluntarily the more worthy alternative and to reject the less worthy. Consumption cannot be
determined by his views regarding his needs and what he is willing
to sacrifice to satisfy them, nor by his views as to what constitutes
the general welfare. It will be pure accident if the job assigned to
him is the one he would prefer above all others. Communism must
end in slavery.
Nor is there any reason to expect that the slavery would be benevolent. The concentration of power required to make the system
work is bound to corrupt those in authority. Natural inclinations
must be constantly checked and thwarted. Having thrown away
the "carrot" of personal incentives, communist planners have no
choice but to use the lash and the concentration camp.
Communism is one of the Great Illusions of our age. It is indeed
a specter haunting not just Europe, as Karl Marx proclaimed in the
Communist Manifesto, but the whole world. Its idealistic but unrealistic distribution formula could not preserve freedom in a society
of angels. Its imposition on societies of weak and selfish men could
only end in disaster.
Questions:
1. Identify and distinguish between the so-called "mundane" values
and the intangible values which an economic system must satisfy
if it is to be called "good."
2. "The use of money as a medium of exchange necessarily imposes a
certain superficial similarity on all economic systems." Explain.
3. Discuss critically the strengths and weaknesses of "self-interest" and
the "general interest" as the primary animators or power generators
of economic systems.

COMMUNISM

653

4. Identify the distinguishing characteristics of communism, socialism,
and capitalism regarded as "models" and as political movements.
5. Compare the relative realism of the assumptions underlying the capitalistic and the communistic models, i.e., which set of assumptions
provide the more precise and useful guides for State action. (See
Chapter 20 for the assumptions of capitalism.)
6. State your goals for "the good society" and argue for or against the
desirability of giving economic equality "number 1 priority."

44
)ocian$m

SOCIALISM, as we have seen, accepts for the time being, at any rate, the capitalistic principle that
rewards should be related to contributions. The contributions of
the nonhuman resources, however, are to go to society as a whole.
Only inequalities in wages are to be permitted. Wage differentials
are to be used as inducements, as incentives, and as guides to the
proper allocation of the labor supply, very much as under capitalism.
The citizens are then to be allowed to spend their earned incomes as
they see fit. These two freedoms, it is argued, will suffice to guarantee fundamental human values and without the need of accepting
the inequalities which result from the institutions of private property and the right of bequest. Accordingly we shall call the model
to be examined in this chapter "liberal socialism" to distinguish it
from the authoritarian socialism of the avowed communist.

THE MISES INDICTMENT
In the early 1920s Professor Ludwig von Mises, then of Vienna,
published an article 1 in which he argued that the destruction of
private property in land and capital makes impossible the establishment of objective prices for the material means of production and
hence deprives society of the means of calculating costs. Lacking
the necessary data, the socialist State has no way of determining
what constitutes the most effective use of its scarce material resources. The State could, of course, assign arbitrary prices to every
concrete instrument of production and instruct the plant managers
1
The article was elaborated upon in his Die Gemeinwirtschaft (1921) which later
appeared in English under the title Socialism (1936). His argument and the replies
to his critics are to be found in his Human Action, Yale University Press, New Haven:
1949.

654

SOCIALISM

655

to act as though these were genuine prices. But these prices would
not measure the real economic significance of the instruments of
production and hence would lead to faulty production decisions.
Furthermore the managers could not discharge the entrepreneurial
function which the private businessman discharges in a capitalistic
society. The end result of socialism, according to Mises, is stagnation, progressive impoverishment, tyranny, and war.
The fiasco of the first efforts of the Russian communists to set up
an economy freed from the directives of competitively determined
factor prices forced socialist theorists to deal with Mises' charge.
The majority of them now recognize that Mises has raised an issue
that will have to be met if they are to continue to assert the feasibility of socialism.
The model developed in this section represents the efforts of
honest and competent socialist theorists to meet Mises' criticisms.
It attempts to respect the consumer freedoms and the job freedoms
which Mises held to be essential to the maintenance of a free society.
Curiously enough the outcome is a competitive price-directed socialism which involves the very types of behavior that socialists decry in
contemporary private enterprise societies. Its successful performance requires both perfect markets and a perfect State. It is highly
unlikely that any socialist party would be willing to preserve so
many features of the capitalistic system as this model requires.
Nonetheless the model exercises a tremendous fascination on intellectuals and helps explain why so many people of genuinely liberal
convictions refuse to be disillusioned by recent socialistic experiments.

THE PLANNING BOARD AND THE
PLANNING BUDGET
In the "liberal socialist" model the instruments of production are
socially owned. The technical tasks of production are assigned to
Managers charged with the production and distribution of vendable
goods and services, and to Ministers charged with providing the
services which are either nonvendable or deliberately provided gratuitously. There is no longer any sharp distinction between the
public and the private sectors of the economy. The distinction now
is between activities for which a direct charge is made and activities
provided gratuitously.
The Planning Board. A Planning Board is an essential feature of
this model. It must work out a Plan. The Plan, we are told, will be
democratic in the sense that, in its broad outlines, it will have been

656

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

endorsed at the polls, and that, at intervals, the citizens will have an
opportunity to vote out of office those in power, and, if successful,
to secure die appointment of a new Planning Board charged with
the formulation and execution of a new plan. But between elections
the Planning Board must be clothed with rather plenary powers.
This does not preclude the possibility of frequent small changes to
meet technical shortcomings or popular dissatisfactions as registered
in the press and public discussions. But it does not exclude the possibility that the control of all jobs will enable those in power to reduce
elections to a farce. For the time being, however, we shall assume
that the citizens retain the power to elect representatives of their
own choosing.
We shall examine this model first on the assumption that our
socialist society has no trading relations with other countries and
then re-examine it on the assumption that it is part of a world of
independent and sovereign countries.
The Planning Budget. The financial aspects of the Plan are embodied in the National Budget. The Board sets up a gross national
product figure in the money of the country—dollars, for example.
This over-all total is broken down into three sub-budgets:
(1) The Public Services Budget: This budget contains the allocation for the gratuitous services and the subsidies for any
vendable services that are to be provided at less than cost.
(2) The Commercial Services Budget: This budget contains the
sum allocated to industries producing vendable goods and
services.
(3) The Investment Budget: This budget contains the amount to
be used for the maintenance and the planned increase of the
nation's capital goods, including housing.
Each of these sub-budgets is broken down into a large number
of smaller budgets, one for each Industry 2 and each Ministry.
Control of current operations. The Planning Board opens up
drawing accounts with the National Bank for each Ministry and
each Industry. (We reserve for later the handling of the Investment
Budget.) The Ministers and the Managers in turn allocate their
credits to various subordinate offices and plants. The Planning
Board may determine the precise amounts to go to these subordinate
agencies, or it may give considerable discretion to the officials in
2
The grouping of plants into industries will prove difficult. Many plants properly
belong to halr-a-dozen or more industries as was noted in the discussion of the WalshHealey Act.

SOCIALISM

657

charge of the ministries and the industries. This is a detail, though
an important one. The principle of decentralization, which "liberal
socialists" make much of, calls for a wide application of intra-agency
allocations.
At the beginning of each new planning period every responsible
operating official will have a drawing account of a known amount
with the National Bank. His task is to use this money to produce as
economically as possible the kind of things he can produce with his
existing physical facilities and to maximize his profits or minimize
his losses. He is expected to compete in the labor market and in the
materials markets for the workers and the supplies he requires.
This competition is expected to produce prices that will clear these
markets and produce identical prices for labor and for materials of
equal significance.
In order to know whether a particular plant is maximizing its
profits or minimizing its losses, it is essential that the Planning
Board charge it for the use of the land, the buildings, and the very
durable equipment entrusted to it. The fixing of the amount of this
charge is one of the thorniest problems confronting the Planning
Board. The charge should certainly be enough to cover the cost of
replacing equipment as it wears out. But this is not enough. An
interest charge must also be added. How is the interest rate to be
determined? We shall deal with this problem in connection with
the Investment Budget. Here we shall simply assume that the appropriate rate has been set and that each responsible operating
official's performance is to be judged on the basis of his ability to
recover from his customers this expense as well as his current
operating expenses.
The land is presumably indestructible. It is essential, however,
that those assigned superior land should be charged a sum equivalent to the rent item in capitalistic accounting. Otherwise there is
no way of comparing the relative efficiency of plant managers or the
true costs of production. The original acquisition price of land
might serve for a time as the basis for determining the land utilization charge, but with every passing year this figure would become
more unrealistic. Socialist theorists say that, since the demand for
specific plots of land is derived from the demand for the products
made with the use of these plots, their values can be imputed. The
absence of a real market for land complicates the problem. It may
very well prevent the Planning Board from getting and keeping each
plot of land in its highest and best use.
So far the tasks confronting the Ministers and the Industry Direc-

658

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

tors are the same. It is with respect to the size of their operations
that differences emerge. The Ministers are expected to spend all
the money allotted to them and to make the money go as far as possible. This is the problem of bureaucratic efficiency that confronts
private enterprise systems, which also have a fairly large public
sector. No issues of theoretical importance are involved.
It is with respect to the vendable goods sector that the problem of
judging and securing efficiency becomes difficult. The problem involves (1) the establishment of efficiency standards; (2) the selection of the Industry Managers and the plant Directors; and (3) the
provision of incentives and disciplines for the managerial group.
Efficiency standards. Uncertainty necessarily prevails in this sector due to the fact that consumers and workers alike have freedom
of choice. Plant managers know what their drawing accounts with
the National Bank are, but they do not know what their expenses of
production and their revenues are going to be. As production proceeds and sales are made, some plants will show profits and others
will show losses. Efficiency requires that the firms showing surpluses should expand outputs until their marginal revenues equal
their marginal costs. The others should contract until their marginal
revenues and their marginal costs are equalized at levels below their
average costs.
If the profits and losses persist, the Managers of the profitable
industries must be able to secure additional capital with a view to
establishing new plants or enlarging existing plants which have not
yet reached optimum size. Conversely some of the capital attached
to the unprofitable industries must be withdrawn. These expansions
and contractions do not involve net capital formation. The proper
procedure, therefore, is for the Planning Board to transfer an appropriate part of the amortization payments of the unprofitable industries to the accounts of the profitable industries and to direct the
Managers involved to make the necessary internal adjustments.
In theory the adjustment of outputs and capacities in the several
industries to changing conditions of supply and demand is simple.
It requires considerable optimism, however, to believe that the adjustments will not be much slower than in private enterprise systems
where the profits and the losses fall directly on individuals and hence
predispose them to react promptly. The Managers of the unprofitable industries will not like to see their domains contracted; they
may be expected to argue that the situations confronting them are
temporary and that they have already taken remedial measures.
The Planning Board cannot possibly possess the detailed knowledge

SOCIALISM

659

needed to evaluate the claims and the counterclaims of the Managers. British socialist experience with the African ground-nut venture and with the coal mines shows how difficult it is for a central
authority to cut losses before they reach serious proportions.
Economic analysis shows that this problem of adjustment is solvable at the theoretical level, and that is all that the economist, as
economist, can say. But if the misgivings of the skeptics should
prove correct, then a considerable element of waste may be part of
the social costs of "liberal socialism."
The selection of the managing personnel. In a private enterprise
system the selection of the managerial group is a relatively coldblooded affair. They must succeed or they are displaced. Competition—and, still more, potential competition—keeps them constantly
on their toes. Technically they are not innovators; yet, in fact, the
managers of successful firms tend to be innovators as well as routine
administrators. Their very large salaries and bonuses are, in part,
rewards for innovation. They may not be risking their own capital
when they propose radical changes, but they risk their reputations
and their jobs.
Would a politically appointed Planning Board be as successful as
private business in the selection of its Industry Managers and the
hundreds of thousands of plant managers? No definite answer can
be given to this question. The writers personally doubt whether the
method of political selection would be as effective as that prevailing
under capitalism—but it might be.
Managerial rewards and disciplines. The socialist method of rewarding the Industry Managers increases the likelihood that their
performance will be inferior to their performance in private enterprise economies. It can be taken for granted that salaries would be
fixed according to some administratively defensible standard, much
as in the civil services of all modern governments. Rewards according to contributions would be but imperfectly realized for this small
but highly strategic group. It is probable that the routine administrative functions would be reasonably well performed. But the
overcoming of administrative lethargy, on the one hand, and the
curbing of overambitious Managers, on the other, would prove
difficult.
The Investment Budget. Two problems are involved in the management of the Investment Budget. The first has to do with the
determination of the proportion of the planned gross national product to be devoted to net capital formation. The second has to do
with the allocation of the investment fund between the Industry

660

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

and the Public Services sectors, and within the Industry and Service
sectors.
The savings-investment decision. In a private enterprise economy
the rate of capital formation is determined not entirely, but to a
considerable extent, by the time-preferences of resource owners.
Can the Planning Board allow the time preferences of the socialist
citizens to play the same role? Theoretically, yes. But note the
dilemma facing the authorities if they attempt to respect this aspect
of consumer sovereignty.
Reliance on voluntary savings produces a "rentier" class, and, if
the right of inheritance were recognized, a greater degree of inequality would develop than that prevailing under capitalism. Under
capitalism, the inheritor must risk his inheritance in the market if he
is to derive any income from it. The inheritor in the socialist society
could only invest in government bonds. He would thus be guaranteed a completely riskless income. The "shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves"
justification for inheritance under capitalism would be gone. It may
be taken for granted, therefore, that the right of inheritance would
be narrowly restricted. But, in that event, the authorities are immediately confronted with another problem. Why should a person save
more than enough to provide for an occasional splurge or for a more
comfortable living in his old age? The socialist citizens, taken as a
group, would make no net savings over their lifetime. The State
would be forced to assume full responsibility for the maintenance
and accumulation of capital.
Abolition of the right of inheritance would involve a further complication. It would introduce a direct incentive for persons with
large earned incomes to spend as they earned. This would lead to a
more flagrant type of "conspicuous consumption" than that which
Thorstein Veblen3 found to be characteristic of private capitalism.
If public opinion frowned upon this type of behavior—and the
egalitarian bias inherent in socialism makes it virtually certain that
this would be the case—men of ability would be tempted to save
with a view to retiring as soon as they had accumulated enough to
live as well as it was safe to live without offending the socialist
mores. In either event, the end result would be waste—either wasteful consumption or a serious loss of man power, and precisely the
man power which the society could least afford to lose.
* Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, Viking Press, Modern Library Ed., New York: 1899. Excerpts relative to the issue raised here are in Gayer,
Harriss and Spencer, Basic Economics: A Book of Readings, Prentice-Hall, Inc., New
York: 1951, pp. 57-60.

SOCIALISM

661

For all these reasons it seems probable that "liberal socialism"
cannot leave to the citizens, in their roles as consumers, the final
decision as to the rate of capital formation. The Planning Board
must decide on the relative importance of the present and the future.
Danger of underinvestment. There are several reasons for believing that this collective decision would result in a rate of capital
formation substantially lower than that typical in either a healthy
private enterprise economy or an authoritarian and war-oriented
socialism.
(1) The greater equality expected to prevail would automatically
decrease the propensity to save, to use a Keynesian expression. The
liberal provisions for the aged, which are part of the socialist promise, would further reduce the incentive to save for retirement. The
destruction of the right of bequest would, as already indicated, encourage the higher wage and salaried workers to live up to their
incomes and retire at an early age. In the absence of compulsions
the "liberal socialist" economy would be a very high consumption
economy.
(2) The democratic processes, which "liberal socialism" would
preserve and respect, would make it politically dangerous for the
Planning Board to call for any large, present sacrifices. Indeed, if
the Party came into power on the basis of roseate promises of an
immediate improvement in the lot of the "downtrodden proletariat/'
the Planning Board might not be able to allocate enough to the Investment Budget to offset the depreciation and depletion of existing
resources. It would be under great popular pressure to permit the
people to live beyond their means while it was consolidating its
power. Recent European experience confirms the reality of this
danger.4
(3) The third reason why investment is likely to be small is
bound up with the problem of innovation. This innovation problem
will be discussed presently. Here it suffices to point out that if
innovation should be stifled the Planning Board would hesitate all
the more to set aside very much for net capital formation. The
reason is fairly obvious. The tendency to diminishing returns oper4
Obviously the people in a popular democracy which is organized on capitalistic
lines can also vote to slow down the rate of capital formation. All that is necessary
is to vote for lavish public expenditures which promote consumption of wealth and
highly progressive taxes which destroy the willingness and the ability of the minority
to create wealth. If the slow-down is carried too far, the capitalistic engine stalls
and the only alternative then may be to charge government with the task of maintaining capital. If this happens, the society has ceased to be a private enterprise
society, and its problems merge with those studied in this chapter.

662

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

ates sharply when investment results simply in the provision of more
of the same sorts of tools and equipment. The future benefits to be
expected from present sacrifices are thus, reduced. Unless "liberal
socialism" can produce an environment "favorable to innovation,
popular pressures will be against a large investment budget. The
reasons for expecting a slowing down of technological progress will
be presented shortly.
The allocation problem. So much for the considerations which
the Planning Board will have to take into consideration in fixing on
a figure for the Investment Budget. Some figure will have to be set
and it will have to be arbitrary. Let us assume that it is a positive
one, i.e., one larger than the sums which the Managers are required
to pay back to the National Bank out of current earnings as amortization and depletion charges on the resources for which they are
responsible. How shall this sum be allocated as between the Public
Services and the Industries, on the one hand, and as between the
several Services and Industries?
The major breakdown, as between the Services, on the one hand,
and the Industries on the other, is a straight political decision which
involves no issues of theoretical interest. The legislatures of all capitalistic countries have to decide how much to devote to road building, new schools, post offices, courthouses, hospitals, and similar
structures. If housing is subsidized, the housing subsidy would appear in the Public Services Investment Budget. All that can be said
here is that the more the Planning Board allocates to this sector of
the Investment Budget, the less will be available for the type of
capital formation on which a long-time rise in the level of living
primarily depends.
The issue of theoretical interest arises in connection with the allocation of the amount appropriated for the capital goods industries.
How shall this fund be divided as between Industries, and, within
each Industry, as between plants?
The decision to operate the system on the basis of consumer
sovereignty and freedom of job choice requires that the Planning
Board auction off this part of the investment fund. The Managers
of the several industries could invite bids from their plant managers,
in the form of statements of the amounts of capital they could profitably use at various hypothetical rates of interest. The plant bids
would be combined into Industry capital demand schedules and submitted to the Planning Board. The Board would then identify the
rate at which the total amount demanded for investment purposes
was just equal to the amount set up in the Budget. Each Industry

SOCIALISM

663

and each plant would thus get the precise amount it could profitably
use at that rate.
In this fashion, it is claimed, a functionally significant interest rate
could be established which would not only serve to allocate the
planned savings, but also to determine the charge to be paid by the
Directors and the Managers for the land and the long-lived capital
already in their possession.
Let us now look at the model as we have developed it up to this
point. Logically it possesses internal self-consistency. If factors can
be moved promptly from contracting to expanding industries, there
is no reason why the economy would not operate continuously at
the full-employment level. But, of course, this is equally true of the
capitalistic model. Socialists claim, however, that the vested interests which cluster around private property prevent the factoral
movements from occurring with the necessary promptitude. Socialization of the means of production is supposed to remedy this
defect and, with it, eliminate the business cycle. The mobility assumption of the capitalistic model is expected to be realized in fact
and not just in theory.
We shall be in a better position to evaluate this claim after we
have considered the problem of innovation.
INNOVATION
How is the innovation problem to be handled? Will "liberal socialism" provide an environment as hospitable to innovation as does the
capitalistic model?
Innovation under Capitalism. Innovation occurs when a man with
a new idea is able to enlist the resources needed to try it out. In a
private enterprise economy the man with the new idea—the inventor
—seldom has the capital needed to back up his idea. He must find
men with imagination and judgment who have funds and who are
willing to risk them. Innovation always involves risks. If successful,
it destroys capital values in other parts of the economy and causes
unemployment there. The automobile destroyed the buggy industry.
The development of fuel oil hurts the coal mining industry. The
innovators are not concerned with these losses. If they had to
shoulder them, anticipated rewards would have to be much greater
than they actually are, and innumerable innovations would be
stifled, despite the fact that the direct and indirect benefits vastly
exceeded the indirect losses.
Innovation is further favored in a private enterprise economy by
the existence of literally millions of potential innovating centers.

664

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

Every individual proprietor, every partner, and every corporate
Board of Directors is a court of appraisal of new ideas. Innumerable
innovations get financed out of the retained earnings of enterprises.
Today our great corporations are our principal innovating centers,
nurturing the ideas, screening them, and providing the capital.
Investment bankers are also sifters of new proposals. A single individual may back a lone inventor.
The point to note here is that innovation flourishes in environments in which contact is easily established between men with new
ideas and men who control liquid capital that can be diverted to the
exploitation of these ideas. At the same time the personal risks
involved lead to a meticulous scrutiny of new ideas and the prompt
cutting short of experiments which fail to meet the acid test of consumer acceptance.
Innovation under "liberal socialism." In the socialist model each
plant manager might be instructed to incorporate in his periodic
statement of the amounts of savings he could profitably use at various rates of interest a figure for investments of an innovating type
to be developed within his organization. This inclusion would shift
the demand schedule for savings to the right and result in a higher
rate of interest. Thereafter the allocation of planned savings to
Industries and to plants would follow as before, and innovating proposals would get their due share of planned savings. The Planning
Board would not have to set itself up as a court of appraisal.
But is this a realistic solution? Could the Board divest itself of
the responsibility for weeding out the less promising proposals?
It must be remembered that men with new ideas are seldom the
best judges of their economic feasibility. They are enthusiasts—dedicated men. Their schemes have to be tested by individuals possessing a rare combination of daring, caution, and judgment. This phase
of the innovating process is at least as important as the idea phase.
In a private enterprise system it is in the hands of men of property
whose willingness to take risks is tempered by the knowledge that
it is their own property they are risking. The large net gains which
an innovating economy enjoys are due as much to the killing off of
impracticable ideas as to the successful maturing of fruitful ideas.
If the Planning Board divested itself of the responsibility of
screening the demands for capital for innovation, the inventors
would enjoy a field day. In that event, however, the proportion of
"screwball" ideas in the investment program would be so high that
the net gain from innovation would be small, or even negative.
It seems probable, therefore, that all innovating ideas that got

SOCIALISM

665

through the screening process at the Industry level would have to
go before the Planning Board, as a final court of appraisal. Furthermore this final court, being responsible for the general welfare,
would have to consider in each case not only the probable gains but
also all of the probable indirect losses involved. These losses would
ordinarily fall in the first instance on other industries. The Managers of these Industries would have to be given a hearing. They
may be expected to point out the problematical character of the
expected gains and the certainty of their own losses and of those of
the workers attached to their industries. It is difficult to escape the
conclusion that technological progress in most fields would be much
slower in a genuinely liberal and humane socialism than under a
dynamic, competitive enterprise system.
"LIBERAL SOCIALISM" AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
One of the attractions of socialism is its alleged immunity to the
business cycle. If "liberal socialism" can abolish the business cycle
and with it the wastes and suffering that have gone with the severe
depressions of the past, its case is very strong. A slow but uninterrupted rate of capital formation might lift levels of living more in a
generation than can private capitalism with its spasmodic investment spurts. And living might be more secure and more satisfying.
The National Resources Committee estimated the loss of potential income
in the eight-year period, 1930-37, for the United States alone at $200 billion dollars. (The Structure of the American Economy, Part I, p. 2 (June,
1938) ). At today's prices the loss would be at least twice as great.
An appraisal of this claim involves two issues: (1) the correctness
of the assumption that major recessions, such as that of the 1930s,
are inevitable under capitalism; and (2) the validity of the assumption that "liberal socialism" could avoid wastes of comparable magnitude.
Capitalism and The Great Depression. For the reasons given in
Chapter 38 we do not regard The Great Depression of the 1930s as
typical. It was the delayed and exaggerated outcome of the First
World War and the improper and fettering governmental interventions of the 1920s. If this is true, the socialist claim should be
judged not by the performance of "fettered capitalism," but by what
can be reasonably expected if governments confine their controls
to measures that are consistent with the operating requirements of
unfettered capitalism.
In one respect, however, the solution of the employment problem

666

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

might prove easier. Unemployment is, to a considerable extent, the
price we pay for change.5 An innovating society is one in which the
rate of change is rapid. In such a society voluntary factor mobility
must be high if involuntary unemployment is to be avoided. One
way to simplify the problem is to stifle innovation. "Liberal socialism," as we have seen, may do precisely this. In a peaceful world
this might not be too high a price to pay for security, but, for the
time being, at any rate, it is a dangerously high price. National survival today depends on strength, and strength, in turn, depends on
strong and progressive industries. The real choice today appears to
be between a dynamic, private capitalism and some form of authoritarian and undemocratic socialism.
"Liberal socialism" and the danger of overinvestment. But even if

we rule out military considerations, it does not necessarily follow
that a "liberal" socialist regime would avoid wastes at least as serious
as those associated with the cyclical fluctuations of a dynamic and
responsible private enterprise economy. The Planning Board would
almost certainly be compelled by international competition to provide considerable sums in the absolute sense for net capital formation. Some of this money would be used to finance investments of
an innovating character. The chances are that the Board would not
be in a position to evaluate the innumerable little innovations that
are constantly being tried out in a regime based on private property.
Most of these would never get as far as the Board. Such time as the
Board could spare from its more routine duties would necessarily go
to the examination of large and ambitious schemes capable of capturing the public imagination and promising early and dramatic
results.6
Once an innovating venture was launched, the reputation of the
Board members would be at stake. It is humanly understandable,
therefore, that they would insist upon pushing an ill-judged venture
5

See David McCord Wright's The Economics of Disturbance, Macmillan Co., New
York: 1947, for a technical and persuasive demonstration of the fact that a dynamic
Socialism would have business cycles.
6
As long as some nations preserve the private enterprise system a socialist regime
can copy the successful innovations developed there and avoid the unsuccessful ones.
The thesis advanced here—that "liberal socialism" involves technological stagnationis more likely to be true in a world entirely organized on that basis than in a world
with a diversity of economic systems. But in such a world the "liberal socialist"
regimes would be parasitic in the sense that they were usually borrowers and seldom,
contributors in the field of new production ideas. A fair evaluation of different models requires that we ask how each would perform if all nations adopted it. It seems
to us that the tendency to technological stagnation must be counted ?s one of the
serious deficiencies in the "liberal socialist" model.

SOCIALISM

667

much further than would any group of men who were risking their
own fortunes. This is equivalent to saying that there would be relative overinvestment in particular fields.
The Russian experience with the first 5-year plan illustrates this danger.
The plan called for the rapid industrialization and modernization of Soviet
Russia. Enormous sacrifices were imposed upon the citizens in order that
resources and man power might be made available for the gigantic task
of modernization. With the factors of production all employed, continuation of the program required a progressive reduction of the resources
devoted to the production of consumer goods. Toward the end of the
period the suffering became so acute, discontent so widespread, that the
plan had to be altered suddenly and radically. Labor and resources were
shifted to the light industries producing consumer goods. The sudden
shift involved the abandonment of all sorts of plants, factories and machines at various stages of completion. From a purely physical point of
view, and using "idle plant" as the test of a business cycle, Russia had
experienced a depression that may have been even more wasteful of her
limited resources than that which the United States experienced in the
1930s.7
Had the Russian experiment been democratically determined the overinvestment would not have been carried so far, but, on the other hand,
the guarantee of freedom of job choice which liberal socialism requires
would have resulted in more unemployment as the emphasis shifted from
the heavy industries to the light industries. In Russia the labor which
had been devoted to the premature industrialization of the country was
promptly reassigned to new tasks, in accordance with the new plan. The
loss was large, but it was spread over the whole people in the form of a
lower standard of living rather than concentrated upon that segment of
the community which had been directly involved in the expansion.8
If our analysis is correct, it follows that the problem of the business cycle is not peculiar to either a planned society or a free enterprise society. It is the price people pay for a change. In the long
run the price paid by people under socialism, whether it be liberal
or totalitarian, may be even greater than under capitalism. The
alleged immunity of "liberal socialism" to the forces which make for
"business cycles" is far from being established.
7

In this connection see Gottfried Haberler, Prosperity and Depression, Geneva:
1941, 3rd ed. enlarged, pp. 45-46. Also Wilhelm Roepke, Crises and Cycles, London:
1936, pp. 102 ff., and James W. Angell, Investment and the Business Cycle, New
York: 1941, pp. 105-8.
8
This is taken with minor alterations from John V. Van Sickle, Planning for the
South: An Inquiry into the Economics of Regionalism, Vanderbilt Univ. Press, Nashville: 1943, pp. 11 ff.

668

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM
"LIBERAL SOCIALISM" AND PEACE

In the socialist literature one of the blackest marks against private
capitalism is that it makes for war. Socialist societies, it is assumed,
would be peaceful. With full employment at home, they would have
no interest in exporting for the sake of exporting. The socialist
citizens, we are assured, would never be duped by the silly fallacy
that a country is enriched by exporting and impoverished by importing. On the contrary, the aim of the Socialist Planning Board would
be to secure as much through imports as possible and to export as
little as possible in return. Thus all socialist societies, it is argued,
would be interested in buying rather than in selling, and, as a consequence, international trade would flourish and the prospects of
world peace would be immeasurably increased.
If the claim is true, capitalism stands condemned. No tolerable
way of life is imaginable if the nations are to plunge into war every
generation. Recent progress in the arts of destruction make international peace one of the great imperatives of our times.
But is the claim true? Neither history nor theory bears out the
claim. Professor Sorokin's studies have shown that war absorbed less
of the energies of men during the 19th century, which was the century par excellence of unfettered capitalism, than it did during the
preceding three centuries.9 With the return to protectionism in the
20th century the destructiveness of war rises to a new high. Quincy
Wright, in his carefully documented Study of War, shows that
throughout all history socialistically organized societies have been
more warlike than societies based on private property and private
enterprise.10 So much for the historical evidence.
Theory indicates why the evidence of history runs against socialism as the way to peace. Socialism must clearly begin at the national
level. Moreover, it must start with some one nation or small group
of nations. The simultaneous adoption of socialism by all the nations
of the world can be dismissed as a practical impossibility. In the
beginning, therefore, we are confronted with an interdependent
world in which the national economies are partly planned and partly
free. This freedom must complicate the task of the authorities in
the socialist countries. From the very beginning, if they do not
accept the status quo, their plans must provoke changes in internal
price relationships. Some prices would be higher, others lower.
However, at the start of the experiment, internal prices are related
9 See Quincy Wright, A Study of War, Chicago University Press, Chicago: 1942.
10 Ibid.

SOCIALISM

669

to prices in other countries. If producers abroad remained free to
sell in the dearest market, an influx of imports would defeat the
program. If high tariffs did not suffice, quantitative restrictions on
imports would have to be imposed to protect the artificial price level.
Conversely the fall in prices of other commodities would increase
exports of these commodities if producers were allowed to choose
between the home and foreign market. Meantime, the producers of
these commodities in the free economies would bear the brunt of this
artificially induced export and would be quite unable to adjust to it.
They would be pitting their private resources against the resources
of a nation. Their protests would be prompt and vigorous. Retaliation by the governments of the free economies, so far as they were
not deterred by fear, would certainly follow, however sincere their
attachment to the doctrine of free trade.
Thus national socialism even by a single powerful economy must
result in a reduction of its trade with the rest of the world. More
than that, it is likely to reduce international trade as a whole. The
free economies, fearing to direct their retaliation exclusively against
the planning country, or feeling bound by most-favored-nation
clauses in their commercial treaties, would be likely to apply their
restrictive measures to all imports, regardless of origin. The resulting internal dislocations would necessitate further public controls to
protect important domestic groups adversely affected by the initial
measures. Physical controls would be a necessary and permanent
feature of the socialistic experiment, at the national level.
But even if it were true that Socialist Planning Boards would
consistently try to secure as much through imports as possible and to
export as little as possible in return, it does not necessarily follow
that international relations would thereby be improved. This policy
really boils down to an international struggle to get more for less.
Logically it would appear to be fully as destructive of good international relations as the mercantilistic policy of trying to maximize
exports and minimize imports.
That "liberal socialism" on a world scale is workable is a theoretical possibility. The prospects, however, of a peaceful merging of
strong socialistic economies into a world socialism is entirely out of
the question at a time when the spirit of nationalism is rampant as
perhaps never before. Socialism, for the time being, must be national socialism and must be divisive and destructive of the principle
of international specialization and international exchange based on
the capitalistic principle of comparative advantage.

670

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

Questions:
1. Compare the distribution formulas of communism, socialism, and
capitalism and summarize Professor Mises' arguments regarding
the importance of private ownership of the instruments of production.
2. Define "consumer sovereignty" and show (a) how it is realized in
the capitalistic model; and (b) how, according to socialist theorists,
it could be realized in the socialist model.
3. Explain the role played by the rate of interest in the determination
of the rate of capital formation in the capitalistic model. State the
arguments for and against the proposition that the Socialist Planning Board could also use the rate of interest for determining the
rate of capital formation which the socialist citizens would regard as
most desirable.
4. "In a socialist society in which the Planning Board attempted to
carry out the wishes of the citizens the rate of capital formation
could very easily fall behind the rate of population growth." Present
arguments for and against the validity of this statement.
5. "The so-called Keynesian prescriptions for keeping a private enterprise system operating at the full-employment level provides us with
a model that resembles in many respects the socialist model developed in this chapter." Identify the resemblance and the differences
6. The claim is made that the Socialist Planning Board can have for its
guidance "a functionally significant interest rate."
(a) Is it functionally significant in the same sense as the interest
rate in the capitalist model?
(b) Does the use of the Keynesian theory of effective demand call
for a different answer to the question than does the use of the more
traditional economic theory? If so, indicate the nature of the differences.
7. Argue for or against the following propositions:
(a) "Technological progress (innovation) is likely to be higher in
an unfettered private enterprise system than in a democratically
controlled socialist system."
(b) "The problem of the business cycle is peculiar to a private enterprise society."
(c) "If Socialist Planning Boards consistently tried to maximize imports and minimize exports, the results could be as destructive of
good international relations as the mercantilistic effort to maximize
exports and minimize imports."
(d) "The socialist claim that the best way to abolish international
wars is to abolish private capitalism can be supported neither by
an appeal to history nor by an appeal to theory."

45

PLannmg

RECENT years there has been
a tendency for "reformers" to urge that an end be made of the
"sterile" ideological debate on the relative merits of capitalism and
socialism and that we use our intelligences to devise some middle
way that will enable us to enjoy the productivity and the freedom
that capitalism provides and the greater social justice that socialism
promises. Sir William (now Lord) Beveridge's Full Employment in
a Free Society illustrates this approach. Its weakness at the theoretical level is its inadequate treatment of the problem of international integration. More recently and at the invitation of the
Secretary General of the United Nations, a group of distinguished
economists submitted a Report on National and International Measures for Full Employment which attempts to fill in this gap. Despite
ideological differences the experts were able to agree upon a series
of recommendations which they held to be capable of integrating
national economies whether organized predominantly on capitalistic
or predominantly on socialistic lines. As the title indicates, the guiding and unifying objective is to be full employment. Secondary
objectives are individual security, greater personal income equality,
and international integration. The authors take it for granted that
the concrete measures they recommend are consistent with the
principle of freedom.
The recommendations derive from the Keynesian theory of effective demand.
The Report states that there is a level of effective demand which
will assure full employment and that this level can be maintained
indefinitely if the State assures that, at all times, a balance exists
between (a) saving and investment, (b) government revenues and
government expenditures, and (c) exports and imports; or that a
671

672

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

lack of balance in any one pair of factors is offset by an appropriate
lack of balance in one or both of the other pairs. "The sum of factors
having a plus effect on expenditures, private investment, government
expenditure and exports shall equal the sum of minus factorssavings decisions, taxes and imports." The authors of this Report
reject the idea that spontaneous market forces can accomplish this
balancing feat without continuous and far-reaching public interventions. "The central role," they declare, "must be assumed by governments."
The recommendations fall into two groups: those directed at
maintaining domestic full employment and those aimed at preventing national measures from having an adverse effect upon the
employment policies of other nations.
DOMESTIC MEASURES FOR FULL EMPLOYMENT

The Report recommends that all governments, in fulfillment of
the obligations * which they assumed on accepting membership in
the United Nations, should (1) announce the range within which
they propose to keep unemployment (the unemployment target)
and (2) the means by which they expect to do this. In addition they
should (3) announce and adopt supplementary measures to be put
into effect whenever their general programs prove inadequate and
(4) the measures which they plan to take to prevent full employment from producing inflation.
1. The full-employment target. A range of unemployment of from
2 to 4 percent, or from 3 to 5 percent, of wage earners is recommended as the appropriate "full-employment target." The term
"unemployment" is defined as meaning "all workers without work
and seeking work as wage earners, or working short time but willing
and able to work full time." Curiously enough there is no reference
to wage rates in this definition of unemployment, despite the wellknown fact that workers may be unemployed purely and simply
because of their unwillingness to accept work at prevailing wages.
2. The continuing full-employment program. The Report recog1
The reference is to Articles 55 and 56 of the U.N. Charter. The pertinent passage
in Article 55 reads: "With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and wellbeing which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations . . . the
United Nations shall promote:
a. higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development; . . ."
Article 56 reads as follows: "All members pledge themselves to take joint and
separate action in cooperation with the Organization for the achievement of the purposes set forth in Article 55."

PLANNING

673

nizes that the government of a socialistically organized country has
a much wider range of measures at its disposal than has the government of a predominately private enterprise country. The measures
recommended for governments of predominately private enterprise
countries are grouped under five headings: (a) fiscal policy; (b)
control of the volume of private investment; (c) planning of public
investment; (d) stimulation of consumption; and (e) stabilization
of the incomes of primary producers.
(a) Fiscal policy. The term "fiscal policy" covers the taxing,
spending, and borrowing of central governments. The primary purpose of fiscal policy is not to balance the budget of the central
government, i.e., to raise the taxes necessary to cover the expenses
of operating the government, but rather to create a deficit or a
surplus, according as unemployment or inflation, at the full-employment level, threatens. When there is a deficiency in aggregate demand, the experts recommend that governments plan for a deficit
by increasing expenditures or reducing taxes, depending on circumstances. "Where government programs of high social priority await
realization," increased expenditures are recommended. "Where government expenditure programs are adequate, but tax rates are felt
to be high," tax reduction may be the more suitable method. Conversely, the national budget should show a surplus whenever effective demand is expected to be excessive, and again governments
have a choice between reducing expenditures or increasing taxes.
A progressive personal income tax and a widespread social security program designed to secure continuity of income to low-income
groups are endorsed as desirable permanent features of a fullemploymentfiscalpolicy because they exert an automatic stabilizing
influence.
The progressive income tax is regarded as having several great
virtues as an employment stabilization measure. With any given
set of rates the yield is at a maximum when the economy is operating
at the full-employment level, and the upper income groups, whose
marginal propensities to consume are low, contribute a disproportionate part of the total yield. This reduces their propensity to save,
and thus makes it easier for private firms to make use of their reduced savings. At the same time it spares the incomes of the lowincome groups, whose marginal propensities to save are low, and
thus maximizes effective demand for consumer goods and services.
Conversely, if effective demand declines, the yield of the tax drops
even faster than the national income falls, with the result that the
needed inflationary deficit in the national budget emerges auto-

674

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

matically. There is no adequate recognition of the fact that highly
progressive taxes have deflationary investment effects that may more
than offset the inflationary effect of the budget deficit.
Generous social security expenditures are endorsed not only because of their welfare effect and their effect upon consumption, but
also because they tend to decline in good times and increase in bad
times. Hence they contribute to the development of a budgetary
surplus at such times as full employment threatens to produce an
inflationary rise in prices, and of a budgetary deficit whenever a
deficiency in effective demand appears.
(b) Control of the volume of private investment. The Report
recommends that governments should encourage or discourage private investment, according as savings tend to exceed or fall short of
the amounts which private firms are prepared to invest. A number
of devices are suggested. "Governments can provide special credit
facilities or give guarantees or special tax inducements to private
investors when it is desired to promote the expansion of investment
in the private sector of the economy. On the other hand, restrictive
credit controls, controls over the capital issues, and, in some cases,
control and allocation of materials can be used when there is a
danger that private investment is expanding too rapidly."
(c) Planning of public investment. Central governments are
urged to plan their investment programs "so as to dovetail them with
thefluctuationsin private investment." Doubt is expressed, however,
regarding the administrative feasibility of varying the scale of public
works rapidly enough to make this a very useful device for offsetting
short-run fluctuations in effective demand.
(d) Stimulation of consumption. The recommendations under
this heading are designed to reduce the dependence of a country on
investment as a means of maintaining effective demand. The alleged
shortcoming of the investment route to full employment is that it
leads to a rapid increase in the national income and to a still more
rapid increase in the volume of savings. If these savings are not to
cause unemployment, additional investment outlets must be found
for them. The people are thus pictured as condemned to making
more and more capital goods in order to avoid unemployment, when
what they really want is more consumer goods.
Accordingly the Report suggests that some advanced industrial
countries may find it desirable to maintain effective demand by
encouraging consumption and to this end they should use the instruments of fiscal policy discussed above: a sharply progressive income
tax with relatively high minimum exemptions; generous expendi-

PLANNING

675

tures on social security, education, health, etc. The control of
monopoly prices is recommended as a means of increasing consumer
demand through the reduction of profit margins. "Some countries,"
the experts add, "may wish to extend this principle further and use
price control more generally in order to effect a more equitable distribution of income."
This last statement represents an endorsement of what has come to be
known as suppressed inflation. Orthodox economists are in fairly general
agreement that, in the long run, price controls and the whole apparatus
for allocating resources which go with suppressed inflation are incompatible with the minimum requirements of a predominantly private enterprise
system. Nonetheless a more general use of price control is here envisaged as a permanent feature of a full-employment program.
No less disturbing to orthodox economists is the endorsement of the idea
that the abject poverty presently prevailing in the so-called underdeveloped countries can be reduced by a reduction of saving in the wealthy
countries. This is a revival of the mercantilistic fallacy that the poor
benefit from the lavish consumption expenditures of the wealthy.

(e) Stabilization of incomes of primary producers. The Report
approves special agricultural price supports for the producers of
agricultural staples on the ground that fluctuations of effective demand tend to affect the level of agricultural prices rather than the
levels of production and employment.
3. Automatic compensatory measures. The foregoing measures
are recommended as permanent features of an employment stabilization program. Some of them operate automatically as the effective
demand generated in the private sector of the economy rises and
falls. Thus with stable rates and exemptions, the yield of a progressive income tax rises and falls with rising and declining production
and employment. Collections (payroll deductions) and disbursements made in connection with a social security program similarly
vary with business conditions. Collections increase and disbursements decrease in good times and the reverse holds true in bad
times. The experts are doubtful, however, whether such automatic
flexibility would suffice to keep employment in predominately private enterprise economies within the "target" range. Accordingly
they recommend that governments build into their programs additional elements of flexibility which would go into effect "whenever unemployment exceeds the range defined in the unemployment
target by some predetermined amount for three consecutive
months." The measures involved should be "on a scale sufficiently

676

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

large to make an immediate and substantial impact on the employment situation."
Four possibilities are suggested, (a) For countries with welldeveloped progressive income taxes a set of alternative rates and
exemptions might be established which would go into effect automatically whenever unemployment rises above the "target" level.
Lower rates or higher exemptions would leave additional income in
the hands of taxpayers and increase the deficit (or reduce the surplus ) in the government's budget. (b) Another way of accomplishing the same effect would be (i) to reduce the special contributions
used to finance a country's social security program, or (ii) to suspend
the contributions entirely, or, if necessary, (iii) to substitute for
the contributions periodic subsidies to the employers and the employees involved in the program, (c) For countries which rely
heavily on general sales taxes, predetermined variations in the rates
would similarly serve to bring about a quick increase of the purchasing power in the hands of private individuals and firms, (d) Governments should try to operate their normal public works programs
in a countercyclical fashion, but they should recognize that the scale
of operations cannot be varied rapidly enough to justify making
public works the main part of a continuing stabilization program.
The advantage of the first three devices is that they are capable of
altering very quickly the volume of effective demand in the private
sector of the economy.
Recognizing the possibilities of abuse in a government guarantee
of full employment, the Report suggests that "the executive organs
of the government should have the power to waive the obligations
under this legislation with respect to automatic compensatory measures, when there is clear evidence that a rise in unemployment is due
to causes other than a fall in effective demand and cannot be cured
by a stimulation of effective demand." When such a situation arises,
and the executive organs of the government "wish to make use of
this waiver, they should announce the precise reasons for their
action." Here, and very timidly, the Report recognizes that structural maladjustments or monopolistic practices may be responsible
for the decline in employment and that their prescriptions will prove
of no avail.
4. Stabilization of the price level. The fourth general recommendation has to do with the stabilization of the general price level,
and the safeguarding of the economy against the inflationary effects
of trying to cure unemployment by increasing effective demand,
when there is clear evidence that the rise in unemployment is due

PLANNING

677

to other causes. Among these other causes recognized by the Report
are (a) temporary shortages and bottlenecks which bring speculative price increases in their trail; (b) monopolistic practices by
organized groups within the community, such as trade unions, farm
organizations, trade associations, and cartels.
Despite these guarded references to the threat of inflation inherent
in any program of guaranteed full employment, the Report's major
concern is clearly with the threat of deflation as the result of an
inadequacy of effective demand. The lack of concern with inflation
appears to be due to the conviction that the modern State is far more
adequately equipped for cutting off an inflation than it is for overcoming deflation. We are familiar with the anti-inflation techniques
which the experts have in mind: a budget surplus; an increase in
the rediscount rate of the Central Bank; an increase in the legal
minimum reserves of member banks; an increase in down payments
on installment buying; and open market operations. These curbs are
evidently regarded as so powerful that the experts find it necessary
to warn that "a rise in prices provides no necessary evidence of a
general excess of demand/' Consequently, "if attempts were made
to curb such price increases by restrictions of demand, they might
only lead to reductions in employment and production even without
a reduction in prices. Price increases resulting from factors other
than a general excess of demand require selective measures of a
direct or indirect nature, rather than measures which are the inverse
of measures taken to stimulate demand. They should take the form
of qualitative or quantitative credit control (introduced in particular
threatened sectors of the economy), direct controls over inventories,
and selective controls over prices."
The Report recognizes the danger of inflation confronting a country with a well-organized trade union movement, but offers only
very general advice regarding the handling of the situation: "If there
is evidence of a continued general upward pressure of money wages
exceeding substantially the rate of increase of productivity and leading to offsetting price increases, the situation requires such action
by the government, jointly with organized labor and employers'
associations, as would ensure that any wage increase that may be
granted will not result in a general price inflation. The character of
the action to be taken would naturally depend on conditions ruling
in each country." These considerations lead to the conclusion that
"it would not therefore be possible to legislate in advance for any
general measure that should automatically come into operation in
the case of inflation." In brief, the principle of automatic built-in

678

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

guarantees against fluctuations in effective demand apply only to
downward fluctuations, not upward fluctuations.
INTERNATIONAL MEASURES

As was shown earlier 2 it is relatively easy to create a predominantly private enterprise model which will operate continuously
at full employment with either a slowly falling, a stable, or a slowly
rising price level, if the following conditions are satisfied: (a) pure
competition in the sector reserved to private enterprise; (b) a perfect State which resolutely and successfully resists the excessive
demands of special interest groups; and (c) complete absence of
commercial relations with other countries. In such a utopia the gold
standard would be unnecessary, and the type of functional finance
recommended in the United Nations Report would be entirely appropriate.
It is evident from the reference to monopoly and to pressure
groups that the United Nations' experts did not accept these unrealistic assumptions. They apparently take the position, however,
that governments will be able to prevent monopoly and pressure
group demands from getting out of hand if everyone knows that
jobs are available at all times.
For the moment let us accept this position and go on to consider
the international measures that governments are asked to take. The
purposes of these measures are:
1. "To create a workable system of international trade for a
stable and expanding world economy and thereby provide the conditions required for the elimination of undue trade barriers and for
the restoration of the convertibility of currencies;
2. "To accelerate the orderly economic development of the underdeveloped areas of the world; and
3. "To prevent the international propagation of fluctuations in
effective demand."
1. Measures to restore international trade. In order to create

a workable system of international trade the Report recommends
that the Member Governments keep in constant touch with one
another with respect to their national full-employment programs
with a view to integrating them into a harmonious whole. Each
government is asked to indicate the "planned value" of its exports
and of its imports and to state how it expects to handle the difference between the two magnitudes. This is referred to as the establishment of national "balance of payments targets."
2 See Chapter 23.

PLANNING

679

Countries with "chronic deficits" in their balances of payments on
current account should indicate by how much they plan to increase
the value of their exports or reduce the value of their imports.
Countries with "chronic surpluses" should declare the amount by
which they intend to increase their imports or reduce their exports,
and the amount of long-term lending which they wish to undertake
on a continuing basis. These "targets" are to be expressed in quantitative terms and then adjusted at frequent intervals in the light
of actual experience. The purpose of this recommendation is to
create a situation in which countries with favorable balance of
payments on current account will invest abroad the precise amounts
which the countries with deficits in their balances on current account will need. In one way or another, of course, this equalization of surpluses and deficits always has and always must come
about.
The method of handling the problem recommended here is based
on the assumption that "deficit" countries have a right to borrow
from countries with a surplus. Now a "right" is meaningless unless
somewhere someone has a corresponding "duty." The duty here
rests on the countries with chronic surpluses. They are under a
moral obligation to increase their imports, reduce their exports, or
lend the difference to the deficit countries. The international morality of the domestic full-employment programs of "surplus" countries is judged on this basis. Furthermore the measures they take
must not involve a reduction in their internal production and income, as this would lead, via a decline in the domestic price level,
to the reappearance of export surpluses.
The obligations laid on deficit countries are less severe than
those imposed upon surplus countries. They are expected (a) to
avoid internal inflationary measures which might "compromise their
ability to export and aggravate their need to import; (b) to adjust
their exchange rates downward in the event that their currencies
are seriously overvalued; and (c) to promote such changes in their
internal production structures as are needed to develop the exports
required to achieve balance of payments equilibrium."
2. Measures to encourage stable international investment.3 Since
the world as a whole is a closed economy, the surpluses and deficits
in the balances of payments of the nations must balance out. The
surpluses of "surplus" countries are the deficits of the "deficit" countries. Recommendation 1 calls for the reconciliation in advance of
3

This set of measures is designed to assist in the development of capital-poor
countries.

680

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

the magnitude of the planned deficits of the "deficit" countries and
of the planned surpluses of the "surplus" countries by appropriate
internal adjustments.
This second recommendation is designed to implement the first
one. The "surplus" or lending countries are asked to fix annual
"targets" for long-term international investment for five-year periods
and to guarantee that the investments will, in fact, be made. How
can the governments of predominantly private enterprise economies
do this? The Report recommends that their governments authorize
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to borrow in their national capital markets the full difference between
what their private investors actually invest abroad and the "target"
amounts. The loans should bear the same rates of interest that the
national governments pay on their long-term bonds. The International Bank would then make development loans to the central
governments of the "deficit" countries at a uniform rate of interest
one percent higher than the average rate at which it was able to
obtain funds.
Under this plan the bulk of all future international lending would
be from government to government via an international organization. The experts recognize and approve of this arrangement. Several reasons are given. The first is that stable and adequate
international lending must get started if world chaos is to be
avoided. The second is that the fear of foreign capitalistic exploitation is so great in the borrowing countries that they will not accept the terms which national governments or private investors
would insist upon. The third reason is that the borrowing countries will be willing to give reasonable guarantees to an international
organization and that the latter will thus be in a position to insist
that the funds be used for purposes that ensure the ability of the
borrowing countries to service the loans.4
3. Measures for insulating a depression. The last set of inter4
This is obviously a proposal for political rather than economic lending and should
be judged on this basis. The appraisal should not overlook (a) the probability that
the plan, if actually put into effect, would reduce drastically the volume of private
international investment (why should a government that is guaranteed investment
funds on extraordinarily favorable terms be concerned with creating the legal and social
conditions needed to attract private profit-seeking capital?); (b) the bias in the plan in
favor of state socialism in the borrowing countries; (c) the possibility that the people in
the lending countries will refuse to make the requisite amount of capital available to
enterprises abroad on the terms here proposed, terms which are more favorable than
those on which their own private firms can get risk capital; and (d) the certainty that, if
they refuse, the disappointed expectations aroused by the proposal will contribute
to rather than check the spread of world chaos.

PLANNING

681

national measures is designed to prevent depression in one country
from spreading to other countries. The underlying assumption here
is that any country which undertakes to solve its internal difficulties by allowing its national price level to fall is guilty of pursuing
the "beggar-thy-neighbor" policy to which reference was made
earlier.5 It is said to export its own unemployment and thereby
defeat the domestic full-employment programs of its neighbors.
Consequently these neighbors have a legitimate right to protect
themselves unless the guilty country is willing to offer them
adequate compensation.
The experts suggest two methods by which, singly or in combination, a country suffering from unemployment could make compensation, (a) The first method would be for the government to
purchase foreign goods for stockpiling purposes. In this fashion
it would carry out the commitment in its five-year balance of payments "target" regarding the level at which it planned to maintain
its disbursements for imports. Stockpiling would suffice only if the
decline in demand for imports was very slight, since there are only
a restricted number of commodities suitable for stockpiling. The
second method (b) is regarded as more promising. The guilty government would provide the national banks of the countries whose
exports declined, as a result of its failure to maintain effective demand, with short-term credits equivalent to the amount of foreign
exchange they would have earned had their exports not declined.
In the language of the Report, the government of a country failing
to maintain effective demand and hence full employment would
commit itself to replenish "the monetary reserves of other countries, concurrently with, and to the extent of, the depletion of those
reserves which result from an increase of its own reserves induced
by a fall in its demand for imported goods and services."
The Report contains a number of valuable policy suggestions, but
taken as a whole, it strikes many economists, including the writers,
as completely unworkable and undesirable, whether regarded as a
plan for predominantly socialistic or predominantly private enterprise economies. Professor Wilhelm Roepke, the eminent German
economist now at the Graduate Institute of International Studies
at Geneva, in his review of the Report has characterized it as "an
illusion or a nightmare."
This sort of international collective planning [he writes] cannot be
brought about by the free cooperation of democratic nations, since inter5

See Chapter 26.

682

ALTERNATIVES TO CAPITALISM

national planning presupposes an international state able to give and
enforce its orders like a national state. Such an international state is utterly Utopian and impractical. For, in order that the plan may work, it is
necessary that it be a collectivist international state, whose inevitable
centralism cannot tolerate any kind of international federalism. Yet everyone, including the socialists, agrees that an international federation is the
only way in which, at best, we could hope for an international state in our
lifetime. So much for the illusion.
International planning thus becomes possible only under the kind of
international dictatorship which Hitler called "Grossraum." Then, however, it would be a nightmare, and surely for the authors of the U.N.
Report no less than for all of us.6
Professor Jacob Viner of Princeton University concluded his
masterly review of the Report with this devastating criticism.
I am fully and regretfully conscious of how unsympathetic my account
of the Report has been. I would like to find concluding words which
would soften the impact of what I have said above. Such words, however, would be empty or insincere. I have found myself in conflict with
the values, the goals, as well as with the technical analysis in the report.
Those who share the affection for or tolerance of a closely regulated society which I have found in the report, will rightly find much of my criticism of no weight or even perverse. I should say also in all fairness, that
from the recommendations made by the authors, even more ardent individualists than I am can salvage a substantial number of ideas useful for
the building of even their kind of a better world, and I have tried to take
note of these as I went along. But there are many costs I would not be
prepared to pay for "full employment" even if the alternative were failure
to attain it by a significant margin—although I would have the unemployed generously taken care of. Mass unemployment is intolerable, but
I believe it will be found possible to provide solid guarantees against its
occurrence, on an international as well as on a domestic basis, by means
which serve to strengthen rather than to undermine the foundations of
what remains of a free market, free trade, free enterprise world/' 7

These criticisms seem to be valid. The Report appears to be
based on the fallacious assumption that almost any type of unemployment can be cured by a little dose of inflation. The fact is
that the plan would be workable only in a world in which there
was reasonably complete factor mobility, and in such a world
6 The Economics of Full Employment: An Analysis of the U.N. Report on National
and International Measures for Full Employment, The American Enterprise Association, New York: 1952, p. 31.
7
"Full Employment at Whatever Cost," in The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August, 1950, p. 407.

PLANNING

683

there would be no need for the elaborate and hopelessly complicated national and international planning devices developed so ingeniously in the Report.
Questions:
(In the questions which follow, the United Nations Report on National
and International Measures for Full Employment will be referred to as
the UN Report)
1. Identify and discuss critically the definition of unemployment used
in the UN Report.
2. "The authors of the UN Report regard orthodox monetary policy as
a much less reliable device for maintaining domestic full employment
than fiscal policy.
(a) What do you understand by the terms orthodox monetary policy and fiscal policy as they appear in the statement above?
(b) Indicate with supporting reasons your agreement or disagreement with the statement.
(c) In the light of your knowledge of our social security program
and our federal tax system indicate the changes in federal spending
and taxing you think the authors of the UN Report would recommend in the event that unemployment in the United States rose
above the target rate set forth in the Report.
3. Go through the summary of the UN Report point by point as it appears in the text and list the recommendations which you think Professor Viner would (a) approve and (b) disapprove.
4. Cite specific recommendations in the UN Report in support or in
refutation of the charge made by the authors that the Report is
based on the assumption that almost any kind of unemployment
can be cured by a little dose of inflation.
5. Describe and critically evaluate the means by which the authors
of the UN Report propose to bring about a stable flow of international investment funds from the wealthy to the poorer countries.
What is the role assigned to the International Bank? Could it play
this role under its present powers?

Epihogue

W E NOW have come to the end
of our study of capitalism and of possible alternatives. In this
final chapter we, the authors of this book, present our credo—our
reflections as citizens on the policy implications of the analysis of
the book. We know that some of you will not agree with all that
we say. We recognize that the policy implications which we derive
from the analysis are not the only ones that can be so derived.
Moreover, it is the analysis itself, not the material of this chapter,
which is necessary to economic understanding. At the same time
we feel that the professional economist, as a citizen, has a responsibility to make known his position on the important issues of his
day, to "stand up and be counted." That is our purpose in writing
this final chapter.
THE CREDO
Capitalism admittedly is far from perfect; yet with all its faults
is has brought a larger measure of material well being to more
people than any other type of economic organization hitherto devised by man. Nonetheless its demonstrated productivity is not its
principal virtue. Wherever it has been allowed to flourish it has
given men something far more important than bath tubs, electric
refrigerators, automobiles, and television sets. It has helped build
the foundation on which individual freedom must rest. Because it
requires freedom of choice it has necessarily promoted the kind of
political environment in which men can choose and it is only as men
are free to choose that they can be free and can grow in moral
stature.
Private capitalism further protects this precious freedom of choice
because it works against the most dangerous type of inequality—
685

686

EPILOGUE

inequality in the distribution of naked power. Developments of the
last generation have convinced increasing numbers of thoughtful
men and women that individual freedom depends on the diffusion
of power and on the checks and balances which prevent strong and
ruthless men and groups from tyrannizing over their fellows. It is
becoming increasingly clear that private property and private competitive enterprise are indispensable devices for diffusing power and
directing the enormous drive of self-interest into the production of
goods and services. Some men will always seek power, but, under
private capitalism, ambitous men are induced to seek it indirectly
through service and through the material rewards that go with successful service, rather than directly through the mastery of the political apparatus of the State.
Nor does belief in the virtues of private enterprise imply opposition to all public interventions. In our discussion of the State we
recognized that it is the duty of the State to provide the environment in which private enterprise must, in its own interest, serve
the general interest. We stressed particularly the role of government as the agency for promoting knowledge and mobility and enforcing responsibility. The discharge of these functions opens up a
wide arena for public action. The enforcement of the principle of
responsibility, particularly in connection with multiple-purpose enterprises, further provides the State with an opportunity to improve
the overall performance of the enterprise system by concentrating
a part of its spending in periods when there is a slacking off of employment in the private sector of the economy. In this connection
monetary policy can also be helpful. Finally we recognized that it
is possible to devise social security measures consistent with the
operating requirements of the private enterprise system which can
have a further stabilizing influence and at the same time, reduce
the human costs of (and hence the resistance to) the frequent and
small adjustments that must take place if people are to retain their
freedom of choice and enjoy the fruits of technological progress.
At this point our political credo merges with our economic credo.
We favor private capitalism because it diffuses power. Similarly we
favor the states and their subdivisions rather than the central government as the principal agencies for carrying out the economic
functions of the State because they remain subject to the disciplines
of interstate and interregional competition. Thus we would prefer
to see the states and not Washington undertake the public works
spending which can be justified by what we have called the principle of responsibility. As long as the responsibility for the dis-

EPILOGUE

687

charge of these functions remains at the state level, we do not
have to worry about the fact that the exact magnitude of the indirect costs and the indirect benefits cannot be calculated in advance. The appropriate limits can be reached by the process of
trial and error. Interstate competition will prevent a state from
going too far just as it prevents a business firm from growing too
large, or a trade union from exploiting the power which comes from
control of the local labor supply.
As long as the area which gains the major share of the benefits
of a public intervention has to meet the costs, there is no danger
that a public intervention will be carried much beyond the point
where costs and benefits balance. If popular pressures force a state
government to go much beyond this point, retribution comes before
any serious damage has been done to the national economy as a
whole. The rise in the local tax burden puts local firms at a competitive disadvantage in interstate commerce. Contemplated expansions are abandoned; capital avoids the state; established firms
migrate to more hospitable locations. As long as benefits and costs
are kept in balance, none of these adverse consequences follows.
The state is a better place in which to live and to do business.
Taxes may be higher than in neighboring states, but there are also
offsetting economies. Interstate competition does not prevent the
states from using the police power to stop private activities that impose serious indirect and uncompensated losses upon their citizens;
nor does it prevent them from subsidizing or carrying on multiplepurpose enterprises. All that it does is impose efficiency and moderation.
When central governments undertake to execute the functions
which derive from the theory of indirect costs and indirect benefits, the compulsion for efficiency and moderation is dangerously
weakened. People in local areas will urge projects of predominantly
local interest which they would never think of supporting if the
money had to come out of their own pockets. The well-known practice of "log-rolling" renders the elected representatives particularly
vulnerable to this sort of pressure. If the resulting waste threatens
to price the national economy out of world markets, the pressure
groups call upon the government to raise tariffs, impose quotas, and
provide export subsidies. If they threaten an undue increase of
taxes, the pressure groups urge that the government borrow the
money from the banking system.
Our own view, then, is that the survival of free and democratic
societies may well depend on (1) the development of a widespread

688

EPILOGUE

popular conviction that peace, prosperity, and freedom depend
upon the maintenance of a vigorous, competitive, and responsible
private enterprise system; and (2) a revival of popular confidence
in the capacity of local units of governments to cope with the problems which arise from the failure of market forces to handle situations involving large indirect costs or indirect benefits. "The Federal Government should be unencumbered in the discharge of its
monstrous major duties by a lot of other jobs it need not do. The
states and local government are the dikes we can build more
strongly against the flood waters sweeping toward the District of
Columbia." *
Does this mean that we are indifferent to great personal, regional,
and international inequalities in levels of well being? Quite the
contrary. We favor the institutions of private property and private
enterprise precisely because we believe that a vigorous, responsible,
and genuinely competitive private enterprise system works constantly, though slowly, to reduce precisely these types of inequality; and that it does this in a fashion which maximizes personal
freedom of choice and which also maximizes, over time, the amount
that can be divided. We believe that the solution of the problem of
poverty is to be found through increasing production over time,
rather than through a drastic equalization of the distribution of
what is being produced at any particular period of time.
As far as personal income inequalities are concerned, we believe
that they could be substantially reduced by a drastic limitation on
the amount of wealth any one individual could inherit. In our
judgment such a limitation on the power of bequest would not
seriously reduce the extraordinary productivity of the private enterprise system, provided the State would, at the same time, remove
the existing obstacles to the accumulation of wealth during a single
lifetime. We do not regard this as a means of transferring wealth
from the rich to the poor. The State would derive little or no revenues from the kind of inheritance tax we have in mind since the
successful money maker would ordinarily distribute his accumulations widely on or before his death. Such a change would force
all young people to start more nearly from scratch. The sons of
successful money makers could continue to live in the style to which
their fathers had accustomed them only as they were able to demonstrate that they had also inherited their fathers' capacities and
their fathers' interest in money making. Such a change would pro1
Quoted from a speech by Adlai E. Stevenson before the Illinois State Fair, August 14, 1952.

EPILOGUE

689

mote equality of opportunity, which is all that the State can safely
undertake to guarantee, without unduly dulling the money-making
incentive. This defense of money making sounds materialistic. On
balance, however, it seems to us the most reliable device man has
yet discovered for getting resources into the uses to which consumers wish them to be put.
As far as regional and international inequalities are concerned it
seems to us that the remarkable development of the Old South
over the last fifty years demonstrates the benefits that flow from
free markets and free trade. If our national government, for example, would cease protecting the established industrial regions
by a high minimum wage, by a protectionist interpretation of the
wage clause in the Walsh-Healey Act, and if it would use its powers
to enforce competition in the labor market so that firms in the less
developed regions of the United States would not be forced to accept the wage rates which competition imposes on firms in the
wealthy industrialized parts of the country, then the poorer states
would attract far more in the way of private risk capital than the
federal government gives them through equalizing grants-in-aid.
The Southern states do not need federal aid. What they need, as
do the people in all the states, is protection against federal paternalism.
What the so-called underdeveloped countries need more than
American aid is an internal decision that they want the material
comforts which modern methods of production make possible and
a willingness to establish conditions that will induce foreign risk
capital and know-how to assist them in the modernization of their
economies. Most of them have natural resources which the outside
world needs and which can be exploited so economically with modern equipment that their governments can secure through taxation
the funds needed to finance roads, education, and health services.
If they will set their own houses in order and if the wealthy countries will open up their own internal markets, there is no reason
to doubt that they can secure private capital as rapidly as they are
able to demonstrate their capacity to use it effectively.
Finally we wish to go on record as believing that private property
and competitive private enterprise are not just fair weather gadgets
to be put in mothballs in rough weather. Quite the contrary. It is
precisely at such times that a free society needs the drives and the
flexible guidance which competitive markets automatically provide.
Authoritative central planning is necessarily inflexible and wasteful.

690

EPILOGUE

Waste and inflexibility are luxuries which a society can least afford
when it is confronted with a great emergency.
What the world urgently needs today is a leveling of the internal
and external barriers to trade and commerce and a release of the
enormous productive energies latent in all societies and their direction through "free markets, free trade, and free enterprise" toward the material and spiritual betterment of mankind throughout
the world.

Appendix A:
The National Accounts

A HE term, accounting, standing alone,
refers to the keeping of records by single firms or institutions. The records describe in money terms the position of the firms or institutions with
respect to (a) economic goods and services and (b) their financial relationships with other firms, institutions, and persons. In social accounting,
the dollar facts about a single firm or institution are combined with the
dollar facts about other firms and institutions. The sums so obtained
represent the accounts of the nation viewed as one large firm or, alternately, as one large household.
This sounds simple enough; just sum the individual accounts and you
have the national accounts. In practice, social accounting is a very complex process. Such conceptual problems as what constitutes income,
what data should be added to what other data, what steps must be
taken to avoid double counting, etc., call for the combined skills of the
accountant and the economist. Problems of estimates and computations
call for the skills of the statistician. The social accountant must also be
thoroughly aware of the sources and quality of the data with which he
must work. All that we can hope to do here is to present an elementary
survey of the subject and to suggest the nature of some of the more
difficult questions that arise.
SOCIAL ACCOUNTING IN A SIMPLIFIED
HYPOTHETICAL SOCIETY

We shall begin our investigation with a description of the process of
social accounting for a much simplified hypothetical society. In this way
we shall be able to isolate and identify the basic concepts and tools of
social accounting before we tackle the confusing and complex data which
are the raw materials of social accounting in our own, very real society.
We shall group all of the economic units in our society into three divisions, or sectors: the Persons Sector, the Business Sector, and the Gov691

692

APPENDIX A

eminent Sector. The Persons Sector embraces a total population of 1,000
persons, grouped into 300 households, or consuming units. We shall assume that the work force is made up of 400 of these 1,000 people. Some
of the households own the homes they occupy, others rent them. The
Business Sector is composed of just four firms. Almost all of the activities of the society connected with making a living are in the hands of
these four firms. The Government Sector represents all units of government, from local to national.
The social wealth. The four firms composing the Business Sector are:
Firm E engaged in extraction (mining, farming, oil, timber, etc.); Firm
F engaged in fabricating the raw materials which are the finished products of Firm E; Firm S engaged in furnishing services (public utilities,
transportation, banking and insurance, barbering, laundering, theater,
music, etc.); and Firm D engaged in the wholesale and retail distribution
of goods.
Firm E sells only to Firm F; Firm F sells to all other Firms, even to
itself in the sense that it uses products it fabricates in further fabrication; Firm S sells to Firms E, F, and D, but not to itself, and it also sells
to or serves the consuming public; and, lastly, Firm D sells only to consumers since it handles only final goods. The society has no foreign relations. We assume an accounting period of one year.
Initial equipment—the sector inventories. In order to account for the
economic affairs of a single business enterprise or of a whole society it is
necessary first to select and establish a starting point. Single business
enterprises and whole societies are going concerns and their economic
affairs flow continuously through time. A fiscal period (usually a calendar year) is an interval of time in the life of a single enterprise or of
a whole society to which it is natural and convenient to relate statistical
measurements of its economic and financial affairs. A fiscal period has
two points of time as its boundaries, say January 1 and December 31,
the beginning and the ending points; and the ending point of one fiscal
year is the beginning point of the next one.
Our procedure in what follows, accordingly, will be to assume beginning inventories for each of the six economic units in our hypothetical
society: Persons; the four Firms E, F, S, and D; and Government. The
beginning inventory of Persons is a combination or consolidation of the
separate inventories of the 300 households. The inventories of the four
Firms will first be shown separately and then consolidated into a single
beginning inventory for the Business Sector. The inventory for the Government Sector is already a consolidation of the inventories of the separate units of Government.
The final step will be to consolidate the three sector inventories into
a single beginning inventory for the whole society. This final single inventory, which is a consolidation of consolidations, is the National
Wealth, as of that moment of time.

693

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
PERSONS—BEGINNING INVENTORY

Cash
Short-lived goods
Durable goods
Real estate and buildings
Government bonds
Capital stock of Firms
Total
Deduct: Mortgage loans
Due to Firms
S and D

$ 100
250
600
3,000
1,000
2,200
$7,150
$500
50

Total debts

550

Net worth
The item "Real estate and buildings" includes all land and houses as
well as the business buildings of the four Firms. We assume that the
mortgage loans are owed to Firm S, which has a banking and insurance
department. The debts to Firms S and D are for groceries, clothes, furniture, light, telephone, medical services, and the like. Certain persons
own the capital shares of the Firms and the Government bonds.
Balance Sheets of Firms. Accountants in real life present the inventories of business firms in the form of balance sheets. The inventory in
social accounting differs from the balance sheet in business accounting
only in arrangement of items. In a balance sheet the debts are displayed
in opposition to goods instead of being subtracted from them as in the
inventory of Persons just presented. We now present the beginning inventories of the four Firms set out in the form of balance sheets.
FIRM E—BEGINNING BALANCE SHEET

Assets
Cash
Due from Firm F
Supplies
Fixed Assets

$30
50
70
250
$400

Equities
Capital stock
(Stockholders)

$400

$400

FIRM F—BEGINNING BALANCE SHEET

Cash
Supplies
Fixed Assets

$ 50
200
400
$650

Account due to Firm E
Capital stock
(Stockholders)

$ 50
600
$650

694

APPENDIX A
FIRM S—BEGINNING BALANCE SHEET

Cash
Due from Persons
Mortgage loans
Supplies
Fixed assets

$200
20
500
30
150
$900

Capital stock
(Stockholders)

$900

$900

FIRM D—BEGINNING BALANCE SHEET

Cash
Due from Persons
Supplies
Fixed assets

$20
30
210
40
$300

Capital Stock
(Stockholders)

$300

$300

Before going any further we need to explain the balance sheet form.
Every business enterprise and every consuming unit can make a list of
its possessions as Crusoe did. In business these possessions are called
assets. But to a business firm "assets" include more than useful economic
goods themselves; they include claims against persons or other firms as
well. For example, Firm E counts as one of its assets an amount of $50
which Firm F owes it; Firms S and D count as assets the loans and other
amounts owing to them by Persons. But it is obvious that Firm E's
claim against Firm F is a two-faced affair, so to speak; that is, to Firm
F it is a liability or debt.
By conventional practice assets appear on the left side of balance
sheets. The right side of each of the four balance sheets has been labeled
equities. The word equities as used here means claims in a business sense. There are two general classes of claims against a business
firm: those of outsiders, called debts, and those of owners. The total
assets of Firm F, for example, are $650, and the claimants to these assets
are (a) Firm E, a creditor in the amount of $50, and (b) the owners or
stockholders, all Persons, in the amount of the remainder or $600. Creditor claims are always senior claims, ownership claims junior claims; one
must satisfy his creditors first. Thus the equities list represents nothing
but relationships with other firms and with persons as the owners or
shareholders.
The beginning inventory for Persons, on the other hand, listed the
assets first (including the stock claims of Persons against all four Firms)
and then subtracted debts of Persons to Firms, reaching a residual figure
which is here called "net worth." This is exactly the same information
as that shown in the balance sheets but it is not in balance sheet form.
The net worth is owners' claims just as in balance sheets, but the owners
in this case are the Persons themselves.

695

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

Consolidation of balance sheets of firms and persons. We are now
ready to derive, by consolidating the five beginning inventories, the
single beginning inventory of two of the three sectors of our hypothetical society: Persons and Business. This consolidated beginning inventory is still not the National Wealth, however, for the Government has
yet to be added. This last step will be taken separately.
The consolidation consists first of rewriting all items on all five balance
sheets (we shall arrange the Persons' statement in balance sheet form,
too, so that it will fit the layout better) in one big balance sheet, doing
some combining as we go. Cash, for example, occurs on all of them,
and we can add the amounts together before we write it. The order
of items is simply hit or miss. The +-marks represent cancellations; an
explanation of them follows the tabulation.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS, PERSONS AND FIRMS

Cash
$ 400
Short-lived goods
250
Durable goods
600
Real Estate, buildings
3,000
Government bonds
1,000
Stock of Firms
+-4 2,200
Due from Firm F
50
+-1
Supplies
510
840
Fixed assets
Due from Persons
50
+-2
Mortgage loans
+-3 500
$9,400

Equities
Mortgage loans
+-3 $ 500
Due to Firms S, D
50
+-2
Net Worth, Persons
6,600
400
Capital Stock Firm E +-4
Capital Stock Firm F +-4
600
900
Capital Stock Firm S +-4
Capital Stock Firm D +-4
300
Account due to Firm E +-1
50

IP

Assets

Next we cancel all the internal or "intramural" claims. Take the $50
owed by Firm F to Firm E: On the separate balance sheet of each Firm
the item appears as an asset on one and as a debt on the other; but if
the two firms go together, the item simply disappears. Separately, it was
necessary for each to show its relationship with the other; combined,
there is no relationship to record—they are one. We have marked all
such matching cancellations with +'s (the -f- meaning "strike it out")
numbered as in the following list.
(1) Debt owed by Firm F to Firm E, $50.
(2) Debts owed by Persons to Firms S and D, $50.
(3) Mortgage loans owed by Persons to Firm S, $500.
(4) Stock ownership claims of Persons against all four Firms, $2,200.
These eliminations reduce the totals from $9,400 to $6,600; cancella-

696

APPENDIX A

tions totaled $2,800. The whole operation illustrates the principle that
social accounting loses or buries the dollar facts about single firms by
combining them in masses with dollar facts about all firms.
We now rewrite the items not cancelled, in more logical order, with
short-lived and durable consumers' goods put together, and with more
conventional social accounting captions. Since all items on the right
side are cancelled, excepting only net worth of Persons, we shall not
even bother to make a balance sheet form, but merely an inventory list.
PERSONS AND BUSINESS—CONSOLIDATED INVENTORY

Cash
Government bonds
Consumers' goods
Business inventories
Machinery and equipment
Real estate and buildings
Total

$ 400
1,000
850
510
840
3,000
$6^600

The government sector. As the last step needed to reach our main
objective, the tabulation of the wealth of the whole society, we present
now a separate balance sheet of the Government. The Government too
has assets and equities peculiar to itself; and it too is a part of the
society.
BALANCE SHEET—GOVERNMENT

Gold and silver hoards
Public lands, forests
and buildings

$150
500
$650

Cash outstanding
Government bonds
outstanding

$ 400
1,000
$1,400

This balance sheet of the Government is unusual because it is not
in balance. Since debts exceed assets the result is a sort of negative
net worth, which could be written in as a Deficit of $750 on the left side
to force a technical equilibrium. Cash, we might remark here, is supposed in this problem to represent only paper money and subsidiary
coins. Hence the cash cancels in the consolidation.
We now consolidate the Government with all the rest of the society
already consolidated. The pattern is the same as before: Government's
debts both disappear, the paper money debt cancelling the cash now
in the consolidated inventory of Persons and Business, and the longterm debt cancelling Persons' bond investments. The hoard of precious
metals and the public lands go into the list, and so we now arrive finally
at the inventory of the

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

697

NATIONAL WEALTH OF HYPOTHETICAL SOCIETY

Consumers' goods
Gold and silver hoard
Business inventories
Machinery and equipment
Real estate and buildings

$ 850
150
510
840
3,500
$5,850

This final total of national wealth is $750 smaller than the consolidated
inventory of Persons and Business; and this $750 is, or represents, the
government deficit. Taken by itself Government appeared to be insolvent; the society as a whole, however, is not insolvent.
The social income. We are now ready to examine the production, consumption, and income accounts of our same hypothetical society. We
shall continue to keep our original assumption of isolation—that is, no
foreign relations.
Income statements. We shall begin the study of national or social
income with income and expense accounts. Single business enterprises
in the modern world summarize the operating statistics of their accounting periods in a financial statement often called a Profit and Loss Statement or an Income Statement. A typical example of such a statement,
much condensed, might look like this:
Sales
$1,000
Less—Purchases of goods . . . $700
Rent
20
Salaries and wages
170
Other operating
expenses
60
950
1 50
Net Income
Less distributions
10
Interest to lenders.
50
Profits to owners . .
40
In the technical left-right or debit-credit form equivalent to the balance
sheet, these same facts might be displayed thus;
TECHNICAL FORM OF INCOME ACCOUNT FOR A FIRM

Year Ended December 31, 195Purchases of goods
$ 700 Sales
Operating expense
60
Wages
170
Rent
20
Interest
10
Profits
40
$1^000

$1,000

$1,000

698

APPENDIX A

We need to stress particularly an important difference between the
concepts which lie behind the figures in a tabulation like the foregoing
and those which lie behind the figures in a balance sheet. An asset figure, say merchandise or cash in a retail store, represents the money value
of a real thing which is in the store's possession at a moment of time;
but the figures for purchases and sales in the tabulation above are statistical magnitudes only and tell nothing about the amount of merchandise on hand at any time. These statistical magnitudes imply a flow of
time, an elapsed period of time. So wages and rent too, though they
were presumably paid in cash, are historical totals for a year of different
classes of payments, telling nothing about the amount of cash in the
possession of either the company or the wage-worker at any moment.
Separate income accounts of the four Firms, Coming again now to
our hypothetical society, we present below an assumed income account
for each of the four Firms which attend to all the business of the society:
extraction, manufacturing, services, and distribution. These will all be
in the left-right technical form and in equilibrium as to totals, in order
to facilitate the consolidation which we shall demonstrate later. All are
for the year following the beginning positions given.
FIRM E—INCOME ACCOUNT

Goods from Firm F
Services from Firm S
Wages
Rent
Interest and profits

$ 100
100
750
75
50
$1,075

Sales to Firm F.

$1,075

$1,075

FIRM F—INCOME ACCOUNT

Raw materials from Firm E. $1,075
Own goods used
200
Services from Firm S
200
Wages
1,060
Rent
50
Interest and profits
100
$2,685

Sales to Firm E
Sales to self (contra)
Sales to Firm S
Sales to Firm D
Sales to Government

$ 100
200
50
2,275
60
$2,685

FIRM S—INCOME ACCOUNT

Goods from Firm F . . . . . . . $ 50
. . . . 900
Wages and fees
30
Rent
60
Interest and profits.... . . . .

$1,040

Sales to Firm E
Sales to Firm F
Sales to Firm D
Sales to Government
Sales to Persons

$ 100
200
50
15
675
$1,040

699

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
FIRM D—INCOME ACCOUNT

Final goods from Firm F . . .$2,275
Services from Firm S
Wages
Rent
Interest and profits

Sales to Persons,
,$2,825

$2,825
Some interesting points can be observed from this layout. For example, consider Firm E, the extractive industry. It has combined the
services of its working force (wages), certain manufactured supplies
bought from Firm F (dynamite for quarries and mines, fertilizer for the
farms), outside services furnished by Firm S (electricity, gas, legal advice), the use of the land and buildings permitted by the landlord for
his rent, and the use of long-lived capital equipment permitted by the
lenders and shareholders for their returns in interest and profits: it has
combined these five items, we repeat, into a batch of finished raw
materials which it has passed on to Firm F. Put in a different way, Firm
E has built up these five categories of costs into a "stockpile" of $1,075
worth of finished raw materials; and when Firm F taies over these raw
materials it reimburses Firm E for all the costs so that the latter can
start on another cycle of operations.
Firm F, starting with the $1,075 of costs taken over from Firm E,
adds some more, piling up the values in turn to $2,685 which it passes on
to others or consumes itself, receiving its reimbursements in due course
as Firm E did. In the meantime Firm S, standing on one side, so to
speak, feeds into the mainstream of production another batch of costs,
although the bulk of its services go to Persons. Firm D then takes over
the main pile-up of accumulated costs and adds its contribution to the
total, which it then delivers to Persons in the form of final goods.
The Persons section of the economy, last stage and ultimate objective
of the whole operation, buys the final goods, reimbursing every firm for
all costs incurred all the way down the line from the beginning. In doing this, Persons use for the purpose the very incomes they have themselves received in the process. It is true that Government is also a final
consumer of some of the products of Firm F and some of the services
of Firm S; but at the moment we shall continue to maintain our point
that Persons ultimately reimburse all costs to Firms, because Persons
pay out of their incomes the taxes which Government uses to buy goods
and services. We shall postpone further discussion of this interesting
point, since we shall have occasion to return to it Liter.
The Consolidated Business Income Account. We are now ready to
proceed with the consolidation of Income Accounts for which we have
been preparing. Let us first rewrite as if in a singl^ Income Account

700

APPENDIX A

every item of the four Income Accounts of the Firms. The +'s mark
the cancellations to be made and a key to them follows the tabulation.
FOUR FIRMS—INCOME ACCOUNTS

Firm E

Firm E

Goods from Firm F +-2 $ 100
Sales to Firm F . . . +-1 $1,075
Services Firm S... +-6
100 Firm F
Wages
750
100
Sales to Firm E . . . +-2
Rent
75
Sales to self
200
+-3
Interest and profits
50
Firm F

Sales to Firm S . . .
Sales to Firm D . . .
Sales to Gov't
Firm
S
X #># tip kj
Sales to Firm E . . .
Sales to Firm F . . .

+-4
+-5

50
2,275

Goods from Firm E +-1 1,075
60
Goods from self.. +-3
200
Services Firm S... +-7
200
+-6
100
1,060
Wages
200
+-7
Rent
tin
i
O
50
bales to r irm D . . . +-8
50
Interest and profits
100
Sales to Govt....
15
675
FirmS
Sales to Persons...
Goods from Firm F -f-4
50 Firm D
Wages and fees...
900
Sales to Persons...
2,825
Rent
30
60
Interest and profits
Firm D
Goods from Firm F +-5 2,275
Services Firm S... +-8
50
Wages
350
50
Rent
Interest and profits
100
Total sales
$7,625
$7,625
Total costs
The cancellations again apply to the "intramural" pairs representing
all transactions between firms in the group, leaving uncancelled only
those transactions with Persons and Government outside the business
group. Transactions between Firms are two-faced transactions, that is
to say, a cost to one firm and a revenue to another. The key follows:
(1) Sales Firm E to Firm F ($1,075)
(2) Sales Firm F to Firm E ($100)
(3) Goods fabricated by Firm F used by itself ($200)
(4) Sales Firm F to Firm S ($50)
(5) Sales Firm F to Firm D ($2,275)
(6) Sales Firm S to Firm E ($100)
(7) Sales Firm S to Firm F ($200)
(8) Sales Firm S to Firm D ($50)

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

701

You notice quickly that only wages, rent, interest, and profits remain
uncancelled on the cost side, and only sales to Government and Persons
remain uncancelled on the revenue or sales side. We now rewrite the
uncancelled items, combining all wages and other like items on both
sides. This gives us the
CONSOLIDATED BUSINESS INCOME AND PRODUCT ACCOUNT

Wages
Rent
Interest and profits

$3,060
205
310
$3,575

Sales to Government
Sales to Persons

$ 75
3,500
$3,575

This consolidated business income account marks the second step in
building up the social accounting system of our hypothetical isolated
society. (The first step was the establishment of the amount of the national wealth to begin with.) From this Business Account (we shall
from now on call it the Business Account for short) we draw four tentative conclusions:
(1) that the production or product or output of the four Firms was
$3,575;
(2) that the factor cost of that product was $3,575 (factor land $205,
factor labor $3,060, factor capital $310);
(3) that the market value of the product was $3,575 since it was sold
for $3,575; and
(4) that the income of the population which was derived from or
generated by its industries and commercial firms was also $3,575.
Interim Conclusions. Before proceeding to the next step we would like
to make a summary comment on the results obtained so far. If you will
think of the four Firms as if they were four stages in a giant assembly
line (each Firm by itself being a culminating point for numbers of subassembly lines), you can perhaps imagine the whole of the business part
of society discharging final goods and services as if on a loading dock,
whence they are sold and carried off into consumption. The sale and
delivery of the final goods and services to the consumers constitute the
grand objective of the whole process. One cannot see this by looking
at the income account of a single firm; it becomes visible only after
the consolidation of all the firms has been completed—total sales of
final goods and services, $3,575. The objective of each firm is to get its
own special part of the work done, move out the goods, and realize its
profit. The people who work for any one firm are not concerned with
the question whether they are making and selling intermediate goods or
final goods. The keenest planning and management of which the men
who own and run any one firm are capable are directed toward the making and sale of its own product only; and the business accounting system of each firm measures the results.

702

APPENDIX A

Social accountants, however, are not trying to make money for any
firm; they are not working, as the business accountants are, as an accessory department to a management which is planning and running the
whole economy of a nation. Their interest is scientific, intellectual, abstract; it is like the interest felt by the economist, the political scientist,
and the sociologist. Finding that the total sales of all the Firms in the
society are $7,625, they want to know how much of the sum represents
mere interior pyramiding, so to speak, and how much was the net final
output^the grand objective—the goods and services for consumption.
The consolidation of the income accounts of all the Firms gives the
answer, $3,575, which at one and the same time represents output, factor
cost of output, market value of output, and income. The cancellations
represent the intermediate goods and services, whose values, as they
disappear, pass over into the final goods and services.
We have already summarized this output by factor costs, and we now
re-summarize it in the form of a tabulation of Net Values Added by
Firms. Any single firm necessarily considers that all its expenditures
except its profits are costs or values created by it; but, as social accountants viewing simultaneously all the income accounts, we shall consider
that the values added by each firm consist only of its expenditures for
wages, rent, interest-and-profits, all other values having been added by
some other firm or firms.
BUSINESS OUTPUT—VALUES ADDED BY FIRMS

Beginning
Firm E
Firm F
Firm S
Firm D

$

0
875
1,210
990
500
$3,575

Necessarily we arrive again at the same total output as before, compiled
this time by factor costs incurred within each firm. The results of all the
maneuvering can now be crystallized, for this period and for these four
Firms only, into the following compound or multiple equation:
Business Output = Factor Costs = Values Added = Income Created
The accounts for other sectors. • The Consolidated Business Income
and Product Account so far developed, however, is not the whole of the
society; it does not even show all of the business affairs of the society.
We have yet to add income accounts for the other two sectors of the
economy, Persons and Government, corresponding to the Balance Sheets
for these two sectors. We already have partial data for Persons and
Government in the Business Account, and some new data must be added.
Each of the two new accounts will be in the same technical two-sided
form as the accounts for Firms, that isf each will have expenditures-

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

703

costs on the left side and receipts-revenue-income items on the right
side. (The reader may wish to write out a set of accounts on scratch
paper in order to follow and to verify what we do.) With the Consolidated Business Income Account before us, then, we build up the Persons
Account and the Government Account by taking the following steps,
which we shall index by letter.
(a) We enter on the right side of Persons Account the three items
which already appear on the left side of Business Account. By so doing
we recognize that what is factor cost expenditures to the Business subdivision of the economy is income to the Persons subdivision.
(b) We enter on the left side of Persons Account the sales of
$3,500 to them, and on the left side of Government the $75 of sales to
it, which already appear on the right side of Business Account. Thus we
recognize that what is sales from the standpoint of business is purchases
to the customers at the other end. At this point every statistical magnitude we have is one of a pair and appears twice. Since all our figures
are totals of like transactions, and since every transaction involves two
parties, one paying and the other receiving, every figure must appear in two places, either on one side of one account and on the opposite side of some other account, or on both sides of the same account
like the $200 of goods made by Firm F and "sold to" itself. Thus we
make our record by a double-entry bookkeeping system. The remaining
data, which we shall assume to represent a few other specimen types
of transactions, will follow the same pattern and be entered twice.
(c) Taxes (direct ones like federal income and local property taxes)
paid by Persons to Government, $700. This, of course, is an expenditure
by Persons and a revenue item to Government and should be so entered
(We are intentionally leaving out other taxes which Business and Persons would presumably pay; these will appear at a later stage. As a
matter of fact, Business in our hypothetical society has at present no
money to pay taxes with!)
(d) Government payrolls are $590 (civil servants, teachers, etc.).
This is recognized as an expenditure to Government and an item of income to Persons. Note also that it is a factor cost to the society of
services furnished by Government.
(e) The Government pays $30 interest on its $1,000 of outstanding
bonds, and this again is expenditure of Government and income of Persons.
(f) A third payment which follows the same pattern is $5 of old-age
pensions and unemployment benefits paid to Persons.
(g) Many of the persons in society rent the houses they occupy, but
many own them. The item of rent income which already appears On
the right side of Persons Account represents what was received by the
owners of business buildings and land. Now, of course, the owners of
rented dwellings would receive the additional cash rent from their tenants and would certainly count it as much a part of their personal in-

704

APPENDIX A

comes as the rent received from industry. But we can scarcely count
as social income only the cash rent of the owners of tenant-occupied
houses without estimating the rental value of owner-occupied houses; to
do so would not be consistent. The use and occupancy of dwelling
houses either is social income or is not social income; and if it is, all
houses must be treated alike. We therefore enter $45 on both sides of
Persons Account to represent the sum of the explicit rent paid and received in cash ($25) and the implicit rent paid by each owner of the
house he lives in to himself, so to speak ($20).
(h) A final item is similar to (g) and is well exemplified by the case
of eggs, chickens, and vegetables raised on farms (and hence clearly
part of social product) and consumed there or at near-by church suppers (hence clearly a part of social income) without ever being bought
or sold in any market. Suppose we put in $1 on each side of Persons
Account to represent this kind of economic happening.
We now present the three "social accounts" as they stand at this point,
where we shall leave them. The Business Account has not been changed
by the additions in the series (a) to (h) but will be repeated so that
we can look at them all together.
BUSINESS ACCOUNT

Wages
Rent
Interest and profits
Factor costs

$3,060
205
310
$3,575

Sales to Persons
Sales to Government

$3,500
75

Final goods to consumers.. $3,575

PERSONS ACCOUNT

(b) Purchases from Business $3,500
(c) Taxes to Government... 700
(g) Rent to Persons
45
(h) "Wages-in-kind"
1
(nonmarket output)

$4,246

(a) Wages from Business..$3,060
(d) Wages from Gov't
590
(a) Rent from Business.... 205
(g) Rent from houses
45
(a) Interest and profits, Bus. 310
(e) Interest from Gov't
30
(f) Pensions and benefits ..
5
(h) "Income-in-kind"
1
Total personal income.. $4,246

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNT

(b) Purchases from Business $ 75
(d) Wages
590
(e) Interest on bonds
30
(f) Pensions and benefits...
5
Total expenditures
$ 700

(c) Taxes received

$ 700

Total receipts

$ 700

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

705

The question of definitions. What inferences can we now draw from
our social accounts? Suppose we tackle the concept Income first. Regarding this hypothetical society as a nation, how much (in dollars)
is its national income? For a starter we might argue that the total of the
right side of Persons Account, $4,246, is the best measure, because in a
society which uses money and defines income to be money received as
compensation for personal services (wages and salaries) plus money
received as compensation for the use of privately owned capital and
land, all one has to do is to add up everybody's personal incomes and
one has it. But instantly somebody points out that there are at least two
items in the $4,246 which are not in money at all, viz., (a) the part
($20) of the $45 rent of houses which represents imputed rent of houses
occupied by their owners and the $1 of income in kind.
Someone else now argues that the interest received by Persons on
their Government bonds, and the old-age pensions and unemployment
benefits ($30 and $5 respectively), ought to be eliminated since they
were paid out of taxes by the Government, which took the tax money
away from Persons in the first place and now is just handing some of it
back to them. He calls that double-counting.
One gets into the same kind of difficulties if he tackles the concept
of social output or gross national product. Without even attempting to
define output everybody would agree that the market value (and factor
cost) of final goods and services made available by Firms is at least part
of it. This magnitude can be read from either side of Business Account
and is $3,575. Certainly also the $1 estimated value of food produced
and consumed which never got on the markets is output (though, of
course, one could define output in such a way as to exclude it). Dwelling houses themselves would be output in the period in which they were
built, but in that event we cannot count the rent of them, explicit or implicit, as product. What about Government services, then? The Government clearly provides many services from which Persons benefit; but
what figure shall we use—the entire cost of them as in Business ($700),
or factor cost (wages $590 and interest $30), or wages only? It is a
question of definitions.
This discussion need not be pursued any further, and we shall abandon our hypothetical society forthwith. The record is not complete anyhow. We have not said a word about savings-investment or about their
opposites, losses and exhaustion of the society's past savings.
Nevertheless, we have carried out our intentions. Our purposes in the
discussion and demonstrations of the Simplified Hypothetical Society
were:
(1) to establish the technique of consolidation of business balance
sheets and income accounts, a technique which is basic to social
accounting;
(2) to illustrate the double-entry method of recording available data

706

APPENDIX A

in the real world to build up the principal statistical magnitudes
of national income accounting; and
(3) to settle the meaning of certain expressions which occur in the
literature, such as national wealth, factor costs, and value added.
(But the meaning of certain other expressions remains yet to be
settled.)
We come now to social accounting in real life.
SOCIAL ACCOUNTING IN THE REAL WORLD

To put it broadly, the procedure in the real world for finding dollar
statistical aggregates (we have been calling these "magnitudes") to
represent, say, the national income of the United States for a certain
year, or its gross or net national product, or its savings-investment and
so forth is as follows: Take the many and various statistical series that
are actually available from different sources; consolidate them, juggle
them, make corrections in them, then enter them in a series of social
accounts by the double-entry method we are now familiar with. Then
establish consistent definitions for the various aggregates to be accumulated, and accumulate them. It does not sound too difficult, but we have
already found that it is difficult and confusing.
Preliminary Comments. A statistical series is any set of numbers, regularly gathered by somebody, which represents the sum for any period
(the day, week, month, or year) of any type of like occurrences which
happen more or less all the time. There are many statistical series having nothing to do with social accounting; but, of course, the social accountants are concerned with the economic series. Enormous masses of
such economic statistics are available. They are found in the back pages
of the metropolitan newspapers (as bank clearings), in the United States
Census reports, in publications of government departments, etc. The
best way to get an impression of the kind and variety of available
statistics about the business goings-on in this country and in the world
is to glance through a World Almanac, a Census Report, a Federal Reserve Bulletin, or an issue of The Survey of Current Business of the
United States Department of Commerce. In spite of what is available,
however, the statisticians are still not able to find all they want, or to
find it in a usable form. One sees footnotes in the social accounting
documents to the effect that something which should be included, for
instance, in national income is "omitted for lack of data."
One difficulty constantly encountered is "statistical lag." Federal income tax returns furnish an important mass of basic data about the total
incomes, and the kinds of income, of almost all the grown-up population
of the nation; but when will the summaries of this information be available? The final returns for a given year are not even made until March
15th of the following year, and many months of checking and preparation of proofs, reports, refunds and so forth must follow before the

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

707

handling staff can even begin on mere statistics. Thus data needed will
scarcely be available for another year, and corrections and refinements
and various breakdowns may take another year or so.
What we intend to do in this section is to make a list of the actual
numerical data for the United States for the year 1939, with explanations where desirable; to post these data by the double-entry system
already demonstrated to a set of social accounts similar to those of the
hypothetical society of the preceding section; and finally to extract or
build up from these social accounts the statistical aggregates which are
the objective of the whole proceeding. The data for the transactions to
be entered, the accounts and entries themselves, and the aggregates, all
come from a National Income Supplement of July 1947 to The Survey

of Current Business of the United States Department of Commerce, to
which the reader is referred for more details than can be included here.
The same data also appeared in another Supplement in 1951. We shall
naturally use the definitions formulated by the statisticians of the Department of Commerce, recognizing as they do that there is not complete agreement among the experts on all details of the definitions.
Since some of the entries in the presentation in the Supplement are
too technical for the scope of our own exposition, we propose to combine
and telescope some of them in various ways without explanation. We
propose also to take some liberties with the technical language used in
our source in the interests of making it more comprehensible to the
beginner.
There are five accounts instead of the three: Government, Business,
and Persons, plus a Foreign Account and a National Wealth Account.
The Foreign Account will contain a half of every double-entry, summarizing like transactions (such as exports and imports) between persons, firms, or the government of this country and the total of persons,
firms, or the governments of the rest of the world. This Foreign Account must be visualized as a consolidation of many single foreign-nation
accounts just as the Business Account of p. 704 was a consolidation of
the income accounts of the four Firms.
We propose to differ from the Department of Commerce in our presentation and handling of the fifth account used in its Supplements. The
account is the beginning inventory or balance sheet of the United States;
it is the National Wealth, with the assets or wealth on the left and the
debts and the net worth on the right. In the preceding section when
we arrived at the statement of national wealth after consolidating the
separate balance sheets of Firms, Persons, and Government, we presented it as a one-sided statement. In the present section, however, we
need to present the national wealth in the full two-sided form like an
account. There is now another excellent reason for doing this which
was not present in the hypothetical society, that is, the fact that we are
now accounting for foreign transactions as well as domestic ones; and
so we shall be obliged to recognize both debtor and creditor relation-

708

APPENDIX A

ships with foreign countries in the National Wealth Account. In the
hypothetical society there were no foreign debtor and creditor relationships, and all internal debtor-creditor relationships vanished in the
consolidations, so that there were no debts.
Since not enough dollar valuations of the nation's assets are available
from which to build up reasonably complete and reliable aggregates
for the national wealth (the experts have been working on this problem),
we are forced to use either no figures or imaginary ones for the initial
position, which, you remember, has been marked as representing the
whole of past savings-investment goods that are still on hand. We prefer to use no figures at all rather than imaginary ones. The main concern
is the accounting period 1939 anyway, and the changes in national
wealth, debts, and net worth will be available even though the beginning and ending totals are not.
The old three of the five accounts follow the same pattern as hitherto,
with costs-expenditures on the left sides and revenue-income-receipts on
the right sides. The fourth and fifth, however, follow a different pattern.
Since the National Wealth Account is a balance sheet with assets on the
left, increases in assets will appear on the left and decreases in assets on
the right; also, since debts to abroad and net worth appear on the right
side of a balance sheet, increases in either will appear on the right. The
Foreign Account is closely related to the National Wealth Account—it
is one of the assets of which the national wealth is composed; hence increases in the asset appear on the left, decreases on the right. (This is,
no doubt, confusing to read but it should clarify itself as we proceed.)
In referring to the accounts in the text and as titles of the accounts
themselves, we shall use the short names Business, Persons, Government,
Foreign, and National Wealth, and we shall occasionally abbreviate even
these short names to their initial letters, B, P, G, F, and NW. All figures
both in the text and in the accounts are in millions, that is, six ciphers
are dropped. The xs and y's in National Wealth and in Foreign Account
represent the unknown figures of the beginning position; we use y's for
the foreign items to indicate that these items are duplicates, each of the
other. Note that debts due from abroad are much greater than debts to
abroad, an acknowledgment of the creditor position of the United States.
The totals of National Wealth Account (not written) are in equilibrium
at the start, but those of Foreign Account are not, since the Foreign
Account is a part of and subsidiary to the National Wealth Account.
The Entries to the Social Accounts. We are now ready to present the
listing of the data for the entries in the five social accounts. Each
double-entry will be numbered, and this number will be used as an
index in the accounts to assist in tracing items back and forth. The
student may wish to build up his own set of accounts as suggested heretofore. The order of the items in the following list is of no significance.
After the description of each item and any accompanying comment or
explanation, the instructions for making the entry will be given. The

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

709

latter will follow a standard form (which some will recognize as the
form of the journal entry of ordinary business bookkeeping), based on
an ancient business practice of calling left side entries to accounts debits
and right side ones credits. We assume that the xs and t/'s of the beginning position are already entered before we start making entries for
the happenings of 1939.
(1) Sales were: to Persons (final goods, including durable ones),
$63,816; to Government, $5,375; to abroad (exports, of course), $1,123;
and to Business, $8,563. Only the last item needs any explanation. Of
course, all sales were made by Business, and sales by some firms to others
had already been eliminated by cancellation as was done in the hypothetical society. These sales of $8,563 by Business to Business, however,
are not eliminated here because they represent sales of new equipment
and buildings, which increase national wealth and therefore go to the
National Wealth account. The instructions for the entry are given in
technical journal entry form as stated, which will be used in all cases
hereafter without comment. Debits are left-side entries; credits, right
side. Each entry follows this left-right pattern, and each has equal
debits and credits, whether compound, like this first one, or not.
Debit Persons Account
63,816
Debit Government Account . . . 5,375
Debit Foreign Account
1,123
Debit NW Account
8,563
Credit Business (4 items)

78,877

(2) Wages, salaries, and other costs of personal services, $38,011.
This is the familiar cost of the factor labor, and it includes a few items
like directors' fees and company social security contributions, sometimes
not thought of as wages or salaries.
Debit Business
Credit Persons

38,011
38,011

(3) Rent, $3,465. This item includes not only rent payments to persons for business buildings, but also rent payments by persons to other
persons for houses and imputed rent of houses occupied by their owners. To count rent payments for houses, whether explicit or implicit, as
cost of the factor land in building up the national product aggregate
is a conventional piece of statistical juggling. However that may be, the
social accountants have treated rent of dwellings in this way and put
the payments in Business Account.
Debit Business
Credit Persons

3,465
3,465

(4) Interest, $5,417. Includes interest payments by Business, by Gov-

710

APPENDIX A

eminent, by firms or governments abroad, and by Persons, all payments
going to Persons.
Debit Business
3,284
Debit Government
1,205
Debit Persons
801
Debit Foreign Account
127
Credit Persons
5,417
(5) Profits of sole proprietorship and partnership business enterprises,
or their net earnings for their owners, $11,282. Farmers, barber shops,
insurance agencies, shoestores and the like, mostly small businesses. A
partner might have an agreed salary (included in No. 2) and also a cut
of the profits.
Debit Business
11,282
Credit Persons
11,282
(6) Corporation profits, $5,569. Of these profits $1,462 were paid to
Government as profits taxes, another $3,659 to Persons as dividends on
their shares, and the remainder ($448) retained as undistributed profits
added to surpluses. These undistributed profits are transferred to the
right side of National Wealth Account to represent the increase in the
net worth of the shareholders, who are technically the owners of corporate surpluses and to whom undistributed profits accrue.
Debit Business
5,569
Credit Government (taxes)
1,462
Credit Persons (dividends)
3,659
Credit National Wealth ..
448
(7) Business organizations of all kinds carry inventories of raw materials, partly finished and finished goods. The amounts of these inventories are assets, and the consolidated grand total for all firms is one of
the classes of national wealth. Business inventories at any year-end
might be either larger or smaller than at the beginning of that year.
If they are smaller, there has been a reduction of that class of the national wealth indicating a net use within the period of past savings;
if they are larger, national wealth is larger and new savings have been
made. In 1939 there was an increase of $441 in business inventories,
which in the account is treated as if it were a sale by Business to itself,
and added to assets (produced and "sold to the nation," to use a figure
of speech).
Debit National Wealth
441
Credit Business
441
(8) In addition to the interest from abroad which accrued to Persons
as handled in (4), $127, wages and salaries of $2 were paid to residents
of the U. S. (agents here of foreign governments or firms, for example);
and corporate dividends of $137 accrued from abroad.

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

711

Debit Foreign Account
2 and 137
Credit Persons
2 and 137
(9) Undistributed profits of foreign branches of American firms also
accrued, $47. These like the other undistributed profits in (6) increase
national net worth.
Debit Foreign Account
47
Credit National Wealth ..
47
(10) Imports from abroad: by Government $64, by Persons $484. Imports, of course, are an item purchased and consumed or saved here, but
not produced here, the opposite of exports.
Debit Government
Debit Persons
Credit Foreign Account ..

64
484
548

(11) At this point all the entries affecting Foreign Account are complete. The account shows a total of $1,436 added during 1939 to what
foreign countries already owed the United States, offset by $548 due
the other way for imports, equaling a net addition of $888 which, of
course, represents additional foreign investments of individuals, firms,
and government and is added to National Wealth by transfer entry. It
represents also the "balance of international payments." The same entry
would be made, it may be noted, if the balance or any part of it had
been settled in gold.
Debit National Wealth
888
Credit Foreign Account...
888
(12) Wages and salaries paid by employers other than business firms
already recognized in (2). Included are the government payroll $7,430,
and wages and salaries paid by households for personal service and by
nonprofit institutions and welfare funds which perform services for persons $2,167. Nonprofit institutions are considered in these statistics to
be Persons.
Debit Government
Debit Persons
Credit Persons

7,629
2,178
9,807

(13) Contributions by employees and employers for social insurance
$2,136. These are, in effect, taxes on employed persons who typically
never see or handle the money because it is withheld from their wages
and salaries as federal income taxes are withheld today, plus matching
contributions by employers.
Debit Persons
Credit Government . . . . . .

2,136
2,136

712

APPENDIX A

(14) Taxes paid by persons direct to all governmental units, principally federal income taxes and local general property taxes, $2,440.
Debit Persons
2,440
Credit Government
2,440
(15) Indirect taxes $9,365. All sales and excise taxes and others incurred by business except profits taxes and others already handled.
Debit Business
9,365
Credit Government
9,365
(16) Transfer payments $2,963. The largest proportion of this total
represents pensions and unemployment benefits paid to persons by the
government, $2,512. The remaining $451 is similar payments by firms,
but includes also corporate gifts to non-profit institutions such as universities, art institutes and hospitals. It would be well to note here that
these payments are not made for services rendered during 1939 and
hence are not part of the national income.
Debit Business
Debit Government
Credit Persons

451
2,512
2,963

(17) Allowance for depreciation, obsolescence and scrapping of the
equipment and other capital assets (a) of Business $7,914, and (b) of
non-profit institutions $187.
Debit Business
7,914
Debit Persons
187
Credit National Wealth ..
*8,101
A small kink presents itself here in that the credit to National Wealth
in this entry does not represent an increase in net worth as it appears
to do, but rather a subtraction from the fixed assets on the other side.
It is a conventional practice in business accounting to place a subtraction
or negative figure on the side of an account opposite to the positive side.
The offsetting in this manner of depreciation against the assets on the
other side is approximately the equivalent of offsetting exports against
imports in Foreign Account at an earlier point. The item is starred for
this reason.
(18) Government subsidies $485, mostly to farmers, who are, you
remember, consolidated with the Business Account. The credit to Business in this entry is another starred item for a special reason which will
appear later.
Debit Government
485
Credit Business
*485
(19) All entries affecting Persons. Account are now complete, and
when we add the two sides we find $74,743 as the total of income and

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

713

$72,042 as the total of expenditures. The excess of the former over the
latter is, of course, personal money savings, $2,701; and this amount is
transferred to National Wealth as an increase in net worth.
Debit Persons (transfer)
2,701
Credit National Wealth ..
2,701
(20) Entries of government receipts and expenditures are now added,
and show $15,403 and $17,270, respectively. There is obviously a government deficit. We dispose of it by transferring it to National Wealth
Account.
Debit National Wealth
* 1,867
Credit Government
1,867
The debit entry is starred, as you notice, because it represents not a new
asset on the national balance sheet like the three items already there, but
rather a subtraction from net worth. Any mystification brought about
by these starred figures will be cleared up in the summary.
(21) We are now left with only two accounts not in equilibrium,
Business and National Wealth. Business Account has $462 more revenue
than expenses and National Wealth $462 more debits than credits. We
reason that these equal and opposite differences must represent statistical
errors and omissions, and so we extinguish this technical "surplus" of
the Business Account by transferring it to National Wealth to represent
an increase in the net worth of the nation, source unknown.
Debit Business (transfer)
462
Credit National Wealth ..
462
In the actual accounts of the Department of Commerce this item is
called Statistical Discrepancy.
The five social accounts. We now present, one by one, the five accounts which compose the social accounting system. Each entry on both
sides of every account has a brief caption, and also bears the identification
number by which it can be traced back to the listing, for further explanation, or in order to see where its counter-entry went. Following each
account appears a rearrangement of selected items from its left side,
these items being those which, by the adopted definitions of the Department of Commerce, are counted in making up the all-national statistical
magnitudes: National Income, Net National Product, and Gross National
Product. A final recapitulation of the latter follows the presentation of
the five sector accounts. It should be understood that the national income and the other aggregates can be compiled in several ways other
than the two we have selected here; but a couple of illustrations are
sufficient for present purposes. The first compilation from the debit sides
of four of the sector accounts has the advantage that it is most nearly
parallel to the methods of securing the aggregates used in the hypothetical society.

714

APPENDIX A

The Business Account First we present the Business Account, which
is, we repeat, a consolidation of all privately owned firms, whether incorporated or not, which are in business in the hope and expectation of
making money. Business Account includes professional consultants,
farmers, nonprofit organizations serving business (like trade associations
and chambers of commerce) and government enterprises which have
operating costs and income like private enterprises (municipally owned
utilities, the postal service, and others).
CONSOLIDATED BUSINESS INCOME AND PRODUCT ACCOUNT, 1 9 3 9

Costs and Expenditures

Revenue
$63,816
(2) Wages and salaries . .$38,011 (1) Sales: to Persons
3,465
to Gov't
5,375
(3) Rent
3,284
to abroad
1,123
(4) Interest
equipment,
(5) Profits, unincorporated
firms
11,282
buildings . . . 8,563
Increase in inventories
441
(6) Profits, corporations . 5,569
Subsidies from Gov9,365
(15) Indirect taxes
(18) ernment
* 485
(16) Pensions, benefits,
gifts
451
(17) Consumption of initial
capital
7,914
(21) Statistical discrepancy
462
$79,803
$79,803

a)

PARTS OF STATISTICAL AGGREGATES ARISING IN THE BUSINESS SECTOR

Factor cost payments—
Labor (wages and salaries)
(2) $38,011
Land (rent)
(3) 3,465
Capital (interest)
(4) 3,284
Capital (profits)
(5,6) 16,851
Count towards National Income
$61,611
Add other costsIndirect taxes
(15)
Pensions, benefits, gifts
(16)
Statistical discrepancy
(21)
Subsidies from right side (minus) .. (18)
Sub-total, other costs less subsidies
Count towards Net National Product
Consumption of initial capital
(17)
Count towards Gross National Product

9,365
451
462
—485
9,793
$71,404
7,914
$79,318

715

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

The Persons Account. Persons Account, which we present next, includes not only individuals and consuming units as purchasers of final
goods and services and receivers of factor incomes; it includes also nonprofit institutions which serve individuals (hospitals, colleges, museums)
and private trusts, pension and welfare funds. It is like Business Account
a grand consolidation of the incomes and expenditures of thousands and
thousands of units; and most of the cross payments between and among
the consolidated units cancel out in the manner already demonstrated
for the four Firms. Not all, however; for if an institution or a person
purchases the services of another it is a factor payment. For example,
suppose a university derives an income in the form of interest and dividends from the investments of its endowment, say a million dollars. This
is a factor income, being a return to the university for the use of capital.
Suppose the university pays the football coach a salary of $15,000, and
that the coach pays a household employee a salary of $2,000. All three
of these incomes, $1,000,000, $15,000 and $2,000 go into the statistical
aggregate because each represents a factor service, either capital or
labor. It is not double counting to put them all in. It follows that item
12 on the left side of Persons Account represents uncancelled cross payments within the group.

PERSONS ACCOUNT 1939

Expenditure

Income

(1) Final goods, services $63,816 (2) Wages, salaries
801 (3) Rent income
(4) Interest payments .
(10) Imported goods,
(4) Interest income . . .
services
484 (5) Profits
(12) Salaries, wages
(6) Corporate dividends
paid
2,178 (8) Wages from abroad
(13) Social insurance
(8) Dividends from
abroad
contributions . . . 2,136
(14) Taxes
2,440 (12) Wages from
(17) Institutional
Government and
187
Persons
depreciation . . . .
(16) Pensions, benefits
(19) Savings transand transfer
ferred to
payments
National Wealth . 2,701

$74,743

$38,011
3,465
5,417
11,282
3,659
2
137
9,807
2,963
$74,743

716

APPENDIX A
PARTS OF STATISTICAL AGGREGATES ARISING IN THE PERSONS SECTOR

Factor paymentsServices of labor
Services of capital
Count towards National Income and
towards Net National Product
Add: consumption of initial capital
Count for Gross National Product

(12) $2,178
(4) 801
(17)

$2,979
187
$3,166

The Government Account. We have mentioned that government
enterprises which at least purport to meet operating costs out of sales
revenue are consolidated in the Business Account and are not in the
Government Account which follows next. Hence the expenditures in the
latter represent only the general services of the government. Government Account is a grand consolidation of the receipts and payments of
the United States, the states, the counties, the townships, and the cities
and towns.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNT 1 9 3 9

Revenues and
Receipts

Expenditures
(i) Goods and services . $ 5,375
1,205
(4) Interest paid
64
(10) Foreign goods . . . .
7,629
(12) Payrolls
(16) Transfer payments . 2,512
485
(18) Subsidies

(6) Corporate profits
$ 1,462
taxes
(13) Social insurance
contributions . . . .
2,136
(14) Personal taxes
2,440
(15) Indirect taxes
9,365
(20) Transfer deficit to
NW
1,867
$17,270
$17,270

The only item in this account which goes into the aggregates * is item
12, the Government payrolls, which are, of course, payments for the
services of the factor labor, from local school bus drivers to the senators
and the generals and the admirals. It is a large figure—over seven and
a half billions. The single figure, $7,629, counts towards all three of the
aggregates, National Income, Net National Product, and Gross National
Product.
The interest of item 4 is omitted from the statistical aggregates. It is
an example of cross payments that cancel because the payments are not
made as an income return to the owners of capital; no services are
represented.
* In this particular method of building them up.

717

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS
FOREIGN ACCOUNT 1939

Charges to Abroad

Credits to Abroad

1/1/39-Debts due from
1/1/39-Debts due to
abroad
abroad
yy>yyy
(1) Charges for exports $ 1,123 (10) Due to abroad
(4) Charges for interest
127
for imports
(8a) Charges for divi(11) Transfer net indends
137
crease in foreign
(8b) Wages paid
2
investments to
(9) Undistributed
NW
branch profit . . .
47
$1,436

y>yyy
$ 548

888
$1,436

PARTS OF STATISTICAL AGGREGATES ARISING IN THE FOREIGN SECTOR

Factor cost paymentsLabor (wages)
(8b) $ 2
Capital (interest)
(4) 127
Capital (profits)
(8a, 9) 184
Count towards National Income and towards
Net and Gross Product
313

The National Wealth Account. Below is the fifth of the accounts of
the system, the National Wealth Account. It contains no items which
constitute parts of any of the statistical aggregates by the method here
being employed in building up those aggregates. Other methods of
building up the aggregates do make use of some of these items. Because
of the highly technical nature of the account, however, especially the
presence of a starred item on each side, we shall present, following the
technical account, a nontechnical rearrangement of that part of it which
represents the changes of 1939.

718

APPENDIX A
NATIONAL WEALTH ACCOUNT 1939

Assets
1/1/39-Final goods in
hands of consumers
Business inventories . . . .
Debts due from abroad .
Equipment
Land and buildings . . . .
(1) Equipment and
buildings
(7) Increase in bus.
inventories . . .
(11) Foreign investments
(20) Government
deficit

Debts and Net Worth
1/1/39-Debts due to
abroad
x,xxx Net Worth of Persons . . .

y>yyy
XXyXXX

x,xxx

yy>yyy
xx,xxx
XXyXXX

$8,563
441
888

* 1,867

(6) Additions to corporate surpluses
(9) Same for foreign
branches
(17) Exhaustion of
capital assets .
(19) Personal savings.
(21) Statistical discrepancy

$11,759

$ 448
47
*8,101
2,701
462

$11,759

REARRANGEMENT OF THE ACCOUNT
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN NATIONAL WEALTH YEAR 1939

Assets added during year—
Equipment and buildings
Inventories
Foreign investments
Total additions to national wealth, 1939
Less Offset—Exhaustion of initial equipment
Net increase in National Wealth, 1939

$8,563
441
888
$9,892
8,101
$1,791

Verification—

Increases in net worth:
Added to corporate surpluses (domestic)
$ 448
Added to corporate surpluses (foreign branches)
47
Personal savings
2,701
Added to net worth (source unknown)
462
Gross savings-investment of nation, 1939
$3,658
Less offset—government deficit
1,867
Net savings-investment of the nation, 1939
$1,791

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

719

We now have only to bring together the parts of the statistical aggregates as they have been identified after each account.
Some Important Statistical Magnitudes. The statisticians of the Department of Commerce have defined National Income to be "the
aggregate earnings of labor and property which arise from the current
production of goods and services by the Nation's economy. It is the total
factor of costs of the goods and services produced by the economy." We
summarize this first by sectors:
NATIONAL INCOME 1939

Business sector
Persons sector
Government sector
Foreign sector

$61,611
2,979
7,629
313

National Income

$72,532

and second by factor payments:
Wages and salaries
Rent
Interest
Profits
National Income

$47,820
3,465
4,212
17,035
$72,532

"Net National Product is the market value of the net output of goods
and services produced by the Nation's economy." To the factor costs
composing National Income we have only to add the non-factor costs
(except depreciation and capital consumption allowances) which appear
in the Business Account; that is to say indirect taxes, pensions and benefits, and statistical discrepancy less government subsidies.
National Income as above
$72,532
Other costs less subsidies (from Business Account) .. 9,793
Net National Product
$82,325
"Gross National Product is the market value of the goods and services
produced by the Nation's economy, before deduction of depreciation
charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption
of durable capital goods." "Gross National Product comprises the purchases of goods and services by consumers and government, gross private
domestic investment, and net foreign investment." In order to obtain the
figure for gross national product, therefore, we have only to add the two
capital consumption items to the total of net national product just found.

720

APPENDIX
Net National Product (from above) .$82,325
Add consumption of capital:
From Business
7,914
From Persons (institutions)
187
Gross National Product
$90,426

For one more example suppose we build up the same three statistical
magnitudes, starting this time with Gross National Product, and using a
different approach. We shall follow the alternative definition given
above, that is, "purchases of goods and services by consumers and government plus domestic and foreign investment." We select our figures
again from the debit sides of three of the five accounts, not the same ones
as those used in the first computation.
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT 1939

(a) Goods and services purchased by consumersFinal goods and services from Business
Imports
Labor services from Persons
Services of capital
Sub-total

(1) $63,816
(10)
484
(12) 2,178
(4,17)
988
$67,466

(b) Goods and services purchased by governmentFinal goods and services from Business
Imports
Labor services
Sub-total

(1) $ 5,375
(10)
64
(12) 7,629
$13,068

(c) Domestic and foreign investment (Sub-total) . . . (1,7,11) $9,892
(This figure is the increase in the national assets taken
from the rearrangement of the National Wealth Account)
Grand total, Gross National Product
$90,426
NET NATIONAL PRODUCT 1939

Gross National Product (as above)
$90,426
Less capital consumption allowances (item 17 from the
National Wealth Account)
8,101
Net National Product as before
$82,325
Less the nonfactor costs of production, mostly
indirect taxes
(15, 16, 18, 21) 9,793
National Income (as before)
$72,532

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

721

CONCLUSIONS
National Income is an extraordinarily elusive concept. Income is a
process—the process of drawing from useful goods their need- and wantsatisfying powers or qualities. As an idea this definition is as sensible
and as satisfactory for a twentieth-century society as for a Robinson
Crusoe, although one would need to include services as well as goods
for the twentieth-century situation. The idea bogs down and is useless
in practice, however, for how is one to express in dollar language the
process of extracting from a piano in one's home its power to bestow
satisfactions—an "income" that will flow for years and years? Social
accounting is obliged to compromise this difficulty. Social accounting
says that the making of the piano generates incomes in the form of
wages, rent, interest, and profits to the persons whose labor, land, and
capital contributed to its making, and it says that the piano is output
or product when finally sold. This sale of it as a final good closes the
social accounting record. The consequence is that the income from that
product goes, statistically, not to the consumer who bought it and will
get the real income from it, but to Tom, Dick, and Harry who built it
but who will never use it, hear it, or see it again.
There are necessarily many other statistical compromises and adjustments, of which we shall refer only to one that has already been mentioned, that is, "imputations." Home ownership is considered to be a
business, and the sale of new residences is therefore in the Business Account as sales of capital assets. The construction of homes generates
money incomes, just as the making of a piano does, which flow to people
who will (10,000 to 1) never live in the houses they build. Thereafter,
whether the owner lives in it himself or rents it to a tenant, the annual
rent, imputed in the one case and actually paid and received in the other,
finds its way into both national output and national income. Hence both
the construction cost of the house and the annual value of its use are
counted statistically as both product and income in the year of its construction.
Other imputations occur both in the Business Sector and in the Persons Sector. Examples are food and fuel produced and consumed on
farms, free food and lodging furnished by business as wages in kind, and
quarters furnished to teachers, ministers, and nurses. This seems sensible
and clear; the items are added to costs and income just as if they were
paid in cash back and forth. But the services of housewives are just as
clear; yet no recognition is made of them.
It is easy to find fault with the statistical aggregates of social accounting. Their most obvious broad value, at least to the layman, is that they
permit comparisons of the same magnitude for different years. No matter how an aggregate figure for national income is computed, if it is
made up in the same manner year after year at least the omissions and
the inconsistencies are always the same, and hence comparability is not

722

APPENDIX A

seriously impaired. But suppose broad upward changes in price levels
are taking place? The national income of one year may be a third or
a quarter larger than that of another year, yet the entire increase will be
a sham and a deception because of the higher valuations; a hundred
thousand beef cattle may get into the statistics at a higher money figure
than a hundred and ten thousand at another time. One could scarcely
call that an increase in national wealth, although the figures would show
it so. Aggregates can, of course, be converted into "constant dollars" by
the use of index numbers to eliminate and correct for the changing value
of money. This restores the validity of dollar comparisons but at the
same time throws into the converted aggregate a new element of unreality.
Fault is sometimes found because of the alleged dubious nature of
some of the items in Government Account which are counted towards
Gross National Product. No objection can be raised against inclusion of
the factor rewards paid by government jurisdictions for labor services
performed in the public school systems or in the local, state and federal
civil establishments—no objections, that is, beyond the usual claims of
waste and extravagance which would be made with or without social
statistics. The case of the federal military establishment is perhaps not
so clear, especially in war time. Since the whole of the Government
payroll, however, goes into both Gross National Product and National
Income, any labor "services" of a boondoggling nature are statistically
counted even though such services are wholly useless, as payment of
wages to the unemployed to dig holes in the ground and fill them again.
The precise numbers and the neatly balanced accounts and double
entries give an appearance and an impression of accuracy and validity
which they do not really have. The same can be said, to be sure, of the
precise figures and the balanced accounts of private business bookkeeping. But our complicated world could not get along at all without writing figures on pieces of paper within the single business unit. Consider
payrolls and bank accounts, for instance; there is never any doubt as to
what to do with such statistical data when they are available. Action
follows; the wheels turn. The statistical magnitudes of social accounting
do not come to life in this way; they illuminate the past but provide
doubtful guidance for the future. Public policy still depends much more
on good judgment than on statistical aggregates.
Selected aggregates, 1929-1950. We present, finally, two tables, in figures rounded off to the nearest hundred million dollars, taken from data
compiled by the Department of Commerce and printed in its 1951 Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, covering the 22 years 1929
to JLy50.
Table 1 shows Gross National Product and its four constituent parts,
built up in the same manner as in our second illustration given before!
The first four money columns of this table add across (save for minor
variations caused by rounding) to the fifth column, the gross product

723

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

The sixth column is labeled "deflator index," and the numbers which
appear in it are not dollars. Each number is a composite ratio or index
of the prices of the goods and services bought by consumers and Government for each year shown to the prices of those same goods and
services (or corresponding ones) in the year 1939, which is used as the
base year for the entire series. In 1950, for example, the deflator index
is 183.2, meaning that approximately the same package of various goods
and services as would have cost $100.00 in 1939 cost in 1950 $183.20.
Dividing the 1950 gross product of $282.6 billion by this deflator index
gives the quotient $154.3 billion shown in column 7. This last column,
TABLE 1
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND COMPONENTS IN CURRENT AND IN 1 9 3 9

DOLLARS, 1929-1950

(Billions of Dollars)

1

II
X

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950

O

78.8
70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9
56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5
72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6
123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180.2
193.6

2

cc •'H J=3

OQ5
15.8
10.2
5.4
.9
1.3
2.8
6.1
8.3
11.4
6.3
9.9
13.9
18.3
10.9
5.7
7.7
10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.0
48.9

-2 I

8

.8
.7
.2
.2
.15
.4
.1
.1
.1
1.1
.9
1.5
1.1
.2
•2.2

8.5
9.2

•2.1
•1.4

4.6
8.9
1.9
.5
•2.3

9.2

8.1
8.0
9.8
9.9
11.7
11.6
12.8
13.1
13.9
24.7
59.7
88.6
96.5
82.8
30.9
28.6
36.6
43.6
42.5

ozS
103.5
90.9
75.9
58.3
55.8
64.9
72.2
82.5
90.2
84.7
91.3
101.4
126.4
161.6
194.3
213.7
215.2
211.1
233.3
259.0
257.3
282.6

120.9
116.3
105.0
94.2
90.7
95.5
97.7

98.3
102.7
100.9
100.0
101.5
109.5
124.6
133.4
136.2
140.3
152.6
168.6
180.6
179.3
183.2

85.9
78.1
72.3
61.9
61.5
67.9
73.9
83.9
87.9
84.0
91.3
100.0
115.5
129.7
145.7
156.9
153.4
138.4
138.6
143.5
143.5
154.3

724

APPENDIX A

therefore, measures the "constant dollar" output of the nation for each
year, as referred to heretofore, with general price inflation eliminated.
Table 2 presents six other selected statistical aggregates most commonly referred to in studies of the nation's economic affairs. National
Income has already been defined. Personal Income is all of the factor
returns received by persons, plus certain transfer payments. Personal
Income less taxes and other payments to general government gives the
aggregate called Disposable Personal Income, which is the amount of
persons' income available for buying and for saving. Disposable PerTABLE 2
OTHER SELECTED AGGREGATES 1 9 2 9 - 1 9 5 0 , ALL IN CURRENT DOLLARS

Personal
Income

Disposabl
Personal
Income

Less Persional
Consumpition
Expenditiires

87.4
75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6
56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5
81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8
182.7
180.3
198.7
223.5
216.7
239.0

85.1
76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2
59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6
78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9
171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.1
224.7

82.5
73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6
58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2
75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0
151.1
158.9
169.5
188.4
186.4
204.3

78.8
70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9
56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5
72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6
123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180.2
193.6

i^a

* Governr
Surplus
Deficit 1

National
Income

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950

CD

Personal
Savings

Years

(In Billions of Dollars)

3.7
2.9
1.8

S 1.1
D .3
D 2.8

-1.4
-1.2
- .2

D 1.7

1.6
3.6
3.9
1.0

D 1.3
D 2.4
D 1.8
D 2.9
S .7
D 1.5

2.7

D 1.9

3.7
9.8

D .5
D 3.5
D31.2
D43.9
D51.4
D39.2
S 4.6
S13.7
S 8.2
D 2.8
S 8.0

25.6
30.2
35.4
28.0
12.0
3.9

10.5
6.3

10.7

* See Nat. Inc. Sup., 1951 ed., pp. 154-155. Figured Deficit from Table 3, Receipts, and Table 9, Disbursements.

THE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

725

sonal Income, in turn, minus Consumption Expenditures (repeated from
Table 1 for convenience) gives Personal Savings. Government Surplus
or Deficit is not derived from the other figures in Table 2; it comes from
the Government Account of each year just as it did in the example for
1939 given earlier.
Questions
1. A discussion develops between two social scientists as to whether
in a Robinson Crusoe economy there could be any such concept as
interest. Scientist A argues that by definition interest is a price paid for
the use of money capital for a given time, and, since there were no
money transactions in the economy, such a concept as interest would
be nonexistent. Scientist B replies that A's definition is wrong or at least
superficial, and that the essence of the concept interest is: the excess of
the productivity of a given amount of human labor with the aid of tools
over the same amount without tools, or with less or poorer tools. B contends that this excess is the reward to the factor of production capital
in any economy; moreover, that in Crusoe's economy interest, if it could
be measured, would be found to be at a very high rate percent. Who,
if either, is right?
2. Suppose the government of our hypothetical society decided to print
and to feed out into that economy during the period covered by the problem an extra $100 of paper money. In your opinion what changes would
such an action have brought about in the consolidated social balance
sheet as presented on p. 704.
3. The hypothetical society apparently operated without either using
up or adding to its wealth. This is unreal, of course. But can you mention some advantages or virtues which an economy operating without
savings and investment would have over our own? Assume that enough
labor and intermediate goods to maintain and to replace the initial capital are included in the accounts given.
4. One of the component parts of personal consumption expenditures
for services is admissions to motion picture and other theaters. Suppose that as a junior statistician you were assigned the task of finding
out the statistical magnitude of this item of consumer expenditures for
the U. S. for one year, from basic data. How might you go about it?
Where would you look for basic data?
5. Suppose you had a figure representing expenditures of Americans
for foreign travel in a year. Write and explain the "double-entry" which
should be made in order to get this statistical magnitude into the national
social accounts. Do the same for gratuitous exports of food and other
commodities as under the Marshall Plan.
6. Do you accept the proposition that even if 100,000 beef cattle were
worth at the end of a year more in dollars than 110,000 at the beginning
of that year, nevertheless there has been a decrease, and not an increase,
of wealth? Remember that every individual owner of beef cattle would

726

APPENDIX A

consider himself wealthier with 100 cattle worth $25,000 than with 110
worth $22,000; so that if you do accept the proposition, you are in the
position of maintaining that the sum of what individuals would unquestionably consider to be increases in their private wealth does not
necessarily mean there has been an increase in national wealth.
7. A person comparing the constant dollar gross national product of
1950 with that of 1939 (see Table 1) argues that the 69% increase measures accurately the improvement in the general welfare of the population of the U. S. over the 11-year period. Do you agree, or has this
person overlooked some other matters which should be taken into consideration?
8. Suppose the federal administration consciously and intentionally
creates a large government deficit, as actually happened in the early
'thirties, and again much more conspicuously in 1941-1945 (see Table 2).
Does there seem to be any correlation from year to year between the size
of the deficit and the size of the national income? If so could it be
said which was cause and which was effect?
9. In your opinion would it be proper to apply to national income
and other aggregates in Table 2 the same deflator index as was used
in Table 1 to convert current dollars into constant ones?

Appendix B:
Books of Selected Readings

(These publications are referred to in the chart by the brief titles shown
in bold face)
Arthur D. Gayer, C. Lowell Harriss, Milton H. Spencer, Basic Economics:
A Book of Readings (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1951) [Gayer and
Others]
Asher Isaacs, C. W. McKee, R. E. Slesinger, Selected Readings in
Modern Economics (New York: The Dry den Press, 1952 [Isaacs and
Others]
Arleigh P. Hess, Jr., Robert E. Gallmann, John P. Rice, Carl Stern,
Outside Readings in Economics (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1951) [Hess and Others]
Walter Adams and Leland E. Traywick, Readings in Economics: Principles and Problems (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1950)
[Adams and Traywick]
William D. Grampp and Emanuel T. Weiler, Editors, Economic Policy,
Readings in Political Economy (Homewood, I-U.; Richard D. Irwin,
Inc.) [Grampp and Weiler]
Paul A. Samuelson, Robert L. Bishop, John R. Coleman, Readings in
Economics (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1952) [Samuelson
and Others]
Work Books
Clark Lee Allen, Aurelius Morgner, Robert Henry Strotz, Problems for
Economic Analysis (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1948) [Allen and
Others]
Yale Brozen, Workbook for Economics (Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown
Company, 2nd Edition, 2nd Printing, 1948) [Brozen]
727

SUGGESTED COLLATERAL READING
Adams and

V.S.&R.
(Chap.)
1
2
3
4

Traywick
Gayer & Others
(Chapter)
(Selections)
Intro. & ch. I 1,2,3,4
76,77
8

20

2, 3, 5, 7

9
5

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

9

16
18
19
20
21

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
87
88
39
40

41
42
43

Isaacs & Others

(Selections)
1, 2, 3, 4
46, 82, 83, 92
5, 6,13,125, 154,157
26, 28, 29, 51
42, 43, 44, 45
47

15,19
4, pp. 55-6

6,7,8

6

28

42,44
32, 39, 40

15,17,22

64, 65, 93, 94
24

18,19
36,60

73, 78, 80, 81

10

37

74

12, 79,131

41

38,39
30,31,32

23,24,25, 26, 29, 31

16,20

67, 68, 70

38, 78, 80
57, 58, 59, 60

23, 24, 25, 28
40,82

61, 62, 63, 64

41

121-127

27,28

96, 97, 98, 99

79

98, 99,100,101

29

104

81, 82, 83, 84
79,80
68-73

43

15
17

Hess & Others
(Selections)
1, 2, 3, 4
61, 62, 63
85,90
5,8

10 and 11

66,69
30, 31, 96, 97
110
14,130,132,133, 155
90
17, 65, 70
44,45,46,47,52,53,54 51, 53, 63
45,47, 61, 62, 91
50
19
58, 59, 60
68, 71, 72, 92, 94, 95
38,49
20 and 25
55, 56,57, 61
51,73
96,97
54,55, 56,57
48,84
81
87, 88, 89,94
21
64, 65, 66
21, 77,78, 84, 85, 86
13,14,15, 23 66, 67, 69, 82, 83, 84, 93 38, 56, 57, 59
36,85
67
22
133,134,135,136,137,138,139
34, 35, 37
26, 27, 29, 83
46
75, 76
30, 31, 32, 58
55,56
35
47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54 33,34
16,17,18
12,13,14
42,43
71, 112,113,114

100,101, 105, 106

24,25

44
45

107,108
85,102,109,111,112
30, 84,110,113

Epilogue

114

86, 87, 88

102-106,108-111
141-143
147-148
149, 150,152, 153

89

151

69, 70, 91, 92
154,155, 156,157

AND WORK BOOK ASSIGNMENTS
Samuelson & Others
(Selections)

Brozen
(Chapter)

1

1,7

4,5

8
6

4

Grampp and Weiler
(Chapter)

1,1-3

7,8
9,10
11
18
19

20, 21, 22, 23
33,38
21,22,34

Allen & Others
Sections & Problems

II, III, 1, 2, 9, 10
III, 3-8
IV, 1,2; VI, 1; VII, 2
IV, 2, 3
V, 1, 2, 3, 5; VI, 11, 13, 15; VII, 1-5

12,14

29
30

36

28,31
25,27

VIII, 1
V, 4; VII, 12, 14; VIII, 2, 4

26
6,8

25,26,30,31

2,3,43,44,45,46
15
16

44, 45,46, 47

IX, 1, 2, 3
IX, 4, 5
IX, 6, 7

56,57,58, 59, 60

XI, 1-6

48,54
49,50, 51, 52,53

X,l-4

38, 39,40, 41, 42
43

3

15,17,18
14,32
19, 20, 61

1,2

27, 28, 29
35,39

9 and pp. 207-14

9, 36, 37
23

10,11 and pp. 214-18

59,60

16 and pp. 293-303

13

13

43,44,45,46,47

17,18 and pp. 309-26

40,41,42
10,11
12,18
55
56,57

19, 20 and pp. 386-93

4, 5. 21
58, 62, 63, 64

InJLex
Ability to pay
taxes and, 241, 522, 605-6
wages and, 435 ff.
Absolute advantage, 326-7, 331
Acceleration principle, 391
Accounting
business, Appendix A
social, Appendix A
Adjustment
immediate-run, 116, 117-8
international, 339 ff., 349 ff., 357 ff.
interregional, 356-7, 453 ff.
long-run, 117, 123-7
security and, 247
short-run, 116-7, 120-3
Advertising, 196, 223
Agglomeration, economies of, 442
Agriculture; see also Farm
business cycle and, 484, 504
collusion in, 212-4
immigration and, 486-7
national land policy and, 479
New Deal and, ch. 35
and the South, 450
tariffs and, 480-1, 468-7
technological revolution in, 480
Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933,
492-3, 527
Agricultural Act of 1948, 495, 504
American Federation of Labor, 464,
466
Amortization, 98
Andrews, Clay J., 637
Angell, J. W., 401-2, 667 n
Anti-trust, 422 ff.
appraisal, 425

Anti-trust (Cont.)
Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. case, 423
bigness and, 424
"cease and desist" orders, 422
Clayton Act, 423, 465
collusive practices, 423
exclusive sales, 423
Federal Trade Commission Act, 422
Gratz case, 422
interlocking directorships, 423
E. C. Knight Co., case, 424 n
mergers, 423-4
U. S. Steel Corp., 424
Miller-Tydings Act, 430
record, the, 422
"rule of reason," 424
Robinson-Patman Act, 423
Sherman Act, 422, 464
state fair trade laws, 430-1
tying contracts, 423
unfair methods, 425 n
Wheeler-Lea Act, 422
Appreciation, 347
Assistance, public
blind, 527, 537-8
children's services, 528, 538-9
dependent children, 527, 537-8
disabled, 527, 538
old age, 527, 535 ff.
Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co., the Great,
423
Balance of trade payments, 333 ff.;
see also International Trade;
Planning

731

732
Balance sheet
bank, 268-9, 271 ff.
in social accounting, Appendix A
Balance of trade, 545
Bank
assets, 268
balance sheet, 268-9, 271 ff.
capital, 268
check, 278
demand deposits
created, 270
circulation of, 273, 274
destruction of, 273-4
lodged, 270
discount, 270
failures, 319
liabilities, 268-9
notes, 277, 285
ownership equities, 268
rediscount, 289, 316-7
paper, 289
reserve ratio, 278
reserves, legal, 278-9, 289, 291,
293, 295, 298-9
"runs," 312, 315
state, 308
of the United States, the First,
307-8
of the United States, the Second,
308, 615 n
Banking; see also Business Cycle; Federal Reserve System
business cycle and, 407-9
Central Bank, role of, 288
clearing house operations, 275-7
commercial, 268 ff.
and credit creation, 271
limits of, 278-9, 286-7, 291-2
history of, in U. S., ch. 24
Independent Treasury, 309, 315
interest rate and, 291
international trade and, 333-4
investment, 267
Models
No. 1, 282-5, 411, 646
No. 2, 285-8, 646
No. 3, 288-94, 646
No. 4, 294-8, 353, 382, 646
Open market operations, 290-1,
318, 320

INDEX
Banking (Cont.)
"wildcat," 308-9, 323
Barter, 13, 37, 253
Baster, A. S. J., 32
Bell, Jas. W., 406 n
Benefit principle, 241, 522
Bennett, M. K., 44
Beveridge, William (Lord), 671
Big Three Tobacco Co., case, 424
Bigness
anti-trust and, 424
in business, 61, 196, 218, 470, 637
in labor, 218, 470
in government, 218
Bimetallism, 254-6, 303-4
Blum, W. J., 606 n
Bonds, corporate, 57
Brand names, 196, 223
Bricker Amendment, 577 n
Brookings Institution, The, 221, 283 n,
589
Brown, William Adams, Jr., 588 n
Bryan, W. J., 305
Bullock, C. J., 620
Business cycle; see also Effective demand, Fiscal Policy; Planning
acceleration principle and, 374-6,
391
agriculture and, 484, 504
changes in production-mix and,
377-9, 409-11
defined, 372
explanations
effective demand, ch. 28
innovations, 384
mature economy, 397
monetary, 382, 407-8
over-production, 383
price rigidities, 382-3
psychological, 382
structural disequilibrium, 409 ff.
sun spots, 382
underconsumption, 383
federal budget and, 604, 607
fiscal policy and, 603 ff.
fractional reserve banking and, 40810
generalized picture of, 373 ff.,
395 ff.
gold standard and, 340, 406 ff.

INDEX
Business cycle (Cont.)
interest and, 383-4, 389, 410-11
international trade and, 340, 406 ff.
multiplier, the and, 376, 390
phases of, 373
public borrowing and, 400-2, 603-4,
608
socialism and, 665-7
tariffs and, 549
in the U. S., 372, 549-50
wages and, 3, 381
"Buy-American" Act, 552

733

Collective bargaining (Cont.)
and interregional adjustment, 577 ff.
Labor Management Relations Act,
465
and level of wages, 466
under monopsony, 200, 471 ff.
National Labor Relations Act, 465
Norris LaGuardia Act, 465
under oligopsony, 471 ff.
and power, 469
suggested restraints on, 468-9, 472
types of
company-wide, 464
Capacity, normal, 112
industry-wide, 464, 469
Capital
local, 464
defined, 12, 98
pattern, 464
equity, 53
plant, 464
formation, 57, 645
Collusion, ch. 17; see also Anti-Trust;
geographical differentials in, 233
Collective Bargaining; Farm
goods, 12, 98
in agriculture, 215
marginal efficiency of, 391, 395-6
in business, 204
movements, 335, 451-2, 544
and competition compared, 206
productivity of, 169
defined, 204
marginal, 169
enforcing, 205
Capitalism; see also Private enterprise
and factoral rewards, 208, 210
system
government sponsored, 426 ff.
defined, 24
labor-management, 211-12, 468 ft.
and freedom, 242, 685
the law and, 423
operating requirements of, 25 ff.,
and monopoly compared, 207
242 ff.
tariffs and, 428
and power, 685-6
techniques of, 207, 223
and progress, 234
unions and, 209-10
synonyms for, 6
Commercial law, 39
Capitalization, 147-8
Commodity Credit Corporation, 484
Central Bank for Cooperatives, 489-90 Common law, 420-2
Cartel, 69, 206
Communism, ch. 43
Chambers, C. R., 148
Communist Manifesto, 650
Churchill, Winston, 513
distribution formula, 647-8, 650-1
Circular flow, 13, 645 ff.
freedom under, 652
Clark, Colin, 227 n
incentives under, 648
Clark, J. M., 220, 391 n
Marx, Karl, 383, 388, 650, 652
Clayton Act, The, 423, 465
means and ends, 648-9
Collective bargaining, ch. 33; see also
theory of human nature, 651
Unions
theory of inevitability, 650
case for, 209 n, 466-7
Communist Manifesto, 650
Clayton Act and, 465
Comparative advantage, 327-31
collusion and, 209-10
Competition; ch. 6; ch. 18
defined, 463
common law and, 420-2
and factoral rewards, 466
defined, 65 ff.
and inflation, 677

734
Competition (Cont)
forms of,
duopoly, 69, 195
duopsony, 70, 198
effective, ch. 18
ideal, 67-8
monopolistic, 70, 197
monopsonistic, 69, 198
oligopoly, 69, 195
oligopsonistic, 70, 198
pure, 68, 189, 218
workable, 218
functions of, 29, 30
market test of, 67 ff.
in Middle Ages, 420
"perennial gale" of, 223, 425
performance test of, 66
potential, 71, 219
of substitutes, 77, 220
Congress of Industrial Organizations,
464, 466
Conservation, 498
Constitution of the U. S.
Art. 1, Sect. 8, 610
Bricker Amendment, 577 n
Sixteenth Amendment, 623
Consume
average propensity to, 390
marginal propensity to, 390
Consumer
sovereignty, 25
spending, 399, 400
Consumption
defined, 19
function, 390
Cooperation
and division of labor, 35-6
unconscious, 36
Cooperatives
and corporation compared, 54
government promotion of, 55-6
Rochdale Pioneers, 54
taxation of, 55, 56
Copyright, 427
Corporation
charter, 53
and cooperative compared, 54
and partnership compared, 53-4
social significance of, 56 ff.
taxation of, 53, 54, 634

INDEX
Cost
alternative, 95-6
defined, 95-6
fixed, 106-7
average, 107
graphic presentation of, 109-10
indirect, 244-5
long-run, 110 ff.
marginal, 107
opportunity, 95-6
rent as, 154-5
schedule, 107-8
total, 107
average, 107
variable, 106-7
average, 107
Council of State Chambers of Commerce, 457 n
"Crime of 1873," 305
Crusoe, Robinson, 40, 44, 161, 239
Currency; see also Banking; Money
appreciation, 347
colonial, 302-3
commodity, 302
continental, 303
convertible, 362 n
defined, 302
depreciation, 18
devaluation, 293, 347; see Devaluation
fiat, 282
gold, 254
gold certificates, 306
Greenbacks, 256-7, 304, 310, 615 n
history of U. S., ch. 24
management
and business cycle, 407 ff.
theory of, 294 ff.
workability of, 298, 346 ff.
silver, 303
silver certificate, 305-6
subsidiary coins, 256 n
Customs procedures, 504-5
Decentralization
rent and, 439-40
wages and, 439-42
Deflation
and beggar-thy-neighbor
360

charge,

INDEX
Deflation (Cont)
defined, 263, 347
fear of, 677
social consequences of, 263-4
Demand
changes in, 78 ff.
curve, 74-5
defined, 73-4
derived, 178
determinants of, 76 ff.
elasticity, ch. 8
arc, 89
degrees of, 84-5
graphic representation of, 74-5
individual, 73
for labor services, 178, 191
law of, 79
market, 73-4
schedule, 74
as seen by seller
under pure competition, 91-2
under less than pure competition,
191 ff.
Demonetization, 294
Depression; see also Business Cycle;
Planning
The Great, 319, 323, 364, 373, 387,
455, 485, 526, 550, 560
foreign fears of American, 563,
680-1
Devaluation
and beggar-thy-neighbor charge,
359 ff.
denned, 293, 347
full employment, 355 ff.
inadequate, 361 ff.
less than full employment, 354-5
process, the, 349-50
and purchasing power parity, 351-2
Dewey, Thomas E., 638
Diminishing returns
graphic presentation of, 101-2
law of, 99 f.
management and, 103
point of, 99
stage of, 101 ff.
Distribution, chs. 12-15; see also Inequality
formulas
capitalistic, 647

735
Distribution (Cont.)
formulas (Cont.)
communistic, 647-8
socialistic, 648, 654
functional, 130-1, 185
marginal productivity principle of,
137
meanings of, 130-1
personal income, 131-7, 211
Dollar, the, 257, 303, 306
Double taxation, 53-4, 634
Douglas, Paul H., 467
Duopoly, 195
Economics
defined, 3, 6
ethics and, 6-8, 150, 172, 643
Keynesian vs non-Keynesian, 412-4
and passim
mathematics and, 9
philosophy and, 9
physical sciences and, 9
religion and, 9
Robinson Crusoe, 40, 44, 161, 239
value judgments and, 6-8, 146, 150,
172, 452, 643, 645, 685, ch.
31, passim
Effective demand; see also Business
cycle; Full employment; Planning
defined, 390
mature economy and, 397
theory of, ch. 28
appraisal of, 403
assumptions of, 391 ff.
goals of, 389-90, 413-4
and inflation, 402
language, 390
origin of, 387-8
planning and, ch. 45
policy implications of, 398 ff., ch.
45
Elasticity of demand
complementarity and, 90
defined, 84
degrees of, 84-5
determinants of, 89-90
measures of, 87-9
significance of, 86-7
substitution and, 89-90

736
Elasticity of demand (Cont.)
time and, 91
Ellis, Howard, 590
Emergency Banking Act of 1953, 312
Employment; see Full employment
Employment Act of 1946, 398, 555
Enterprise, free private; see Capitalism
Environment, role of, 40-1, 222, 233,
235-6, 573-4, 686
Equality; see Inequality
gospel of, 556, 674-5
of opportunity, 688-9
Equation of exchange, 379
Equilibrium
concepts of, ch. 11
consumer, 82-3
general, 127
immediate-run, 120
long-run, 124, 125-6, 217
rate of exchange, 353
rule, the, 121
short-run, 121, 123
significance of, 127-8
Equities, 268
Erosion; see Soil
Ethics
economics and, 6-8, 150, 172, 643
of communism
as ideal, 647-8
as strategy, 648-9
of interest, 172
of rent, 146-150
and self-interest, 33, 646-7
and wages, ch. 31, passim
Factors of production; see also Resources
defined, 131
proportionality of, 448, 455
Fair trade laws, 430-1
Fair Labor Standards Act, 443 ff., see
also Minimum Wage Law
Fairchild, Fred, 406 n
Farm
credit, 489 ff.
debt, 485, 487
income, 477-8
land values, 485-6
marketing agreements, 495-6

INDEX
Farm (Cont.)
marketing orders, 495-6
migration from, 481
output restrictions, 492 ff.
population, fertility of, 479
price supports, 241, 494 ff.
program, federal, ch. 35
revising, 502-5
tenancy, 482, 502
Farm Credit Administration, 489-90
Farm Foundation, The, 505
Federal Aid; see Public Expenditures,
intergovernmental
Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,
312-3
Federal Intermediate Credit Banks,
489-90
Federal Reserve Act, 313
Federal Reserve System; see also
Banking
appraisal of, 315-6, 322
Board of Governors, 314, 319
Federal Reserve Act, The, 313
note issue privilege, 317
powers of, 314, 316-7
purposes of, 315
relations with U. S. Treasury, 316,
320-1
structure of, 313-4
Federal Trade Commission Act; see
Anti-trust
Federalism, 523-4, 577 n, 668-9, 686-8
Fee, 427
Feudal society, 40, 45
Firm, the, 13, 50 ff.
Fiscal policy, chs. 41, 42; see also
Business Cycle, Planning
and business cycle, 402-5, 496, 603
deficit financing, 401, 603-4, 608
defined, 597
federalism and, 609-11, 614
functional finance, 296, 609
objectives
humanitarian-full
employment,
607
humanitarian-welfare, 604-7
orthodox, 598-603, 613, 622
orthodox-compensatory, 603-4
and planning, ch. 45, passim
Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922, 546

737

INDEX
Fosdick, Raymond B., 7
Foreign Aid, 556, 588-91
Franchise, 427
Freedom, 7, 26, 242, 643, 685
Friedman, Milton, 153
Full employment; see also Effective
demand; Planning; Socialism
British commitment to, 555
dangers, as a slogan, 554, 568-9,
676
devaluation and, 355-7
Employment Act of 1946, 398, 555
fiscal policy and, 296, 607 ff.
in French Constitution, 555
International Monetary Fund and,
567-8
in Israeli Constitution, 555
Say's law and, 251-2
target, 672
in United Nations' Charter, 555
United Nations' Report on, 403, ch.
45
wages and, ch. 31, passim
Functional finance, 296, 609
Fundamental disequilibrium, 355,
560 ff.
Gault, E. H., 431 n
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, 582-3
General Motors Corporation, 46
General property tax, the, 618-9
George, Henry, 146, 156
Goals, social and economic, 6, 412,
643, 651
Gold
certificates, 254
cross of, 305
demonetization of, 294
money, 254
Gold standard; see also Banking; Business cycle; International trade;
Money
beggar-thy-neighbor charge and,
345-6, 359-60
business cycle and, 405 ff.
defined, 257
devaluation under, 293
discipline of, 339 ff., 406-7
export and import points, 258, 338

Gold standard (Cont.)
gold mining, economics of under,
284
gold movements, effects of under.
339-40

indictment of, 258, 345 ff., 564
International Monetary Fund and,
560 ff.
and international price levels,
341 ff., 348, 567
parities, 332
rules of, 339 ff., 406, 567
United States and, 305, 363-4
Gompers, Samuel, 578
Goodrich, Carter, 478 n
Goods
capital, 12, 98
consumer, 12
durable, 96-7
economic, 4
noneconomic, 4
Government; see also Communism;
Planning; Socialism; State
and income redistribution, 217, 638
as promoter of competition, 420-6
as promoter of monopoly, 426 ff.
role of in a market economy, 30-1,
244 ff., 457 n, 598
Grants-in-aid
federal, 628, 629, 689
regional reactions to, 629-30
foreign, 556, 590-2
State, 629
Gratz case, the, 422
Gresham's law, 256
Gross national product, 17, 18, Appendix A
Haberler, Gottfried, 372, 409 n, 667 n
Hansen, Alvin H., 620 n
Harris, Seymour E., 630
Haslam, Reuben S., 458 n
Hawley-Smoot Act of 1930, 546, 551
Hayek, F. A., 409 n
Hoarding, 393
Hobson, J. A., 46
Hoff, Trygve J. B., 644 n
Homestead Acts, 157
Household, 13

738
Human nature
communist theory of, 651
self-interest and, 33, 646-7
Immigration restriction, 486-7, 547-8
Immobility; see Mobility
Incentives
under capitalism, 33-4, 605-6, 646
under communism, 648
diminishing marginal utility and,
82, 605-6
under farm tenant contract, 483
income inequality and, 28, 136-7
progressive taxation and, 403, 412,
605-6
regional inequalities and, 453 ff.
under socialism, 648, 664
Income
disposable personal, 18, 19; see also
Appendix A
distribution, functional, chs. 12-15
distribution, personal, 131 ff.
under communism, 647-8
under socialism, 648, 654
in United States, 131 ff.
farm, 478
money, 16
per capita, 328, 478
personal, 18
psychic, 16
real, 16
Independent Treasury, the, 309, 315
Industrialization
of the Old South, 454 ff., 689
Russian, 236-7
of under-developed countries, 573
Industry
classification, 50
constant-cost, 126-7
decreasing-cost, 126-7
defined, 50
increasing-cost, 126-7
Inequality
capital formation and, 135
causes of, 134-5, 227 ff.
facts re in U. S., 132-3
free enterprise and, 131 ff., 688-9
geographical, 227 ff.
and incentives, 136-7
income, 82, 217, 227

INDEX
Inequality (Cont.)
inheritance and, 134, 217, 688-9
international, 225 ff., 236, 328, 688
mitigating factors, 135-6
monopoly and, 135
power, 686
private property and, 134
progressive taxation and, 604-5,
636-7, 638
regional, 226 ff., 329, 450 ff., 688
Infant-industry and tariffs, 545
Inflation
collective bargaining and, 355 ff.,
677
defined, 263, 347
Keynesian policy and, 402
social consequences of, 263-4
suppressed, 675
in the U. S., 623
Inheritance
and inequality, 134, 688
under socialism, 660
taxes, 635, 688-9
Innovation
and business cycle, 384
under capitalism, 663-4
under competition, 222-3
and progress, 233
under socialism, 664
Insurance
compulsory, 516 ff.
case for, 517
limitations of, 517-8
reserve problem, 518-22
industrial accident, 244
and principle of responsibility, 244,
517
role of, 513-4
social insurance
old age and survivors', 532 ff.
unemployment, 528 ff., 587-8
Integration
international
communism and, 556
foreign aid and, 556, 590-2
full employment and, 555
gold standard and, 407
immigration restrictions and, 544
national planning and, 554
socialism and, 668-9

739

INDEX
Integration (Cont.)
international (Cont.)
tariffs and, 544
interregional
minimum wage laws and, 459 ff.
state tariff barriers and, 430-1
Walsh-Healey Act and, 458-9
Inter-allied debts, 549
Interest, ch. 14
as distributive share, 172
ethics of, 172
explicit, 51
functions of, 171-2
Keynesian position, 389, 393-4
orthodox position, ch. 14, 394,
410-11
liquidity preference and, 166
and saving, 165
time preference and, 165-6
uncertainty and, 163
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, 569 ff., 588
International Labour Organization,
576 ff.
International Monetary Fund, 558 ff.,
570, 588
International trade
absolute advantage, 326-7, 331
balance of payments, 333 ff.
on capital account, 335-6
chronic deficit in, 679
on current account, 334-5
difficulties, 349
fundamental disequilibrium in,
355, 560 ff.
invisible items in, 334
visible items in, 334
balance of trade, Mercantilism and,
543
and beggar-thy-neighbor charge,
360
bilateralism, 558
business cycle and, 340, 406 ff.
"Buy American" Act and, 552
comparative advantage, 327 ff., 331
exporting unemployment, 345-6,
359-60
gold standard and, 332 ff.
under managed currency,
single country case, 349-57

International trade (Cont.)
under managed currency (Cont.)
universal case, 357 ff.
most-favored-nation treatment, 551
multilateralism, 337, 589
national planning and, 543
national price levels and, 341-2, 348
protectionism and, 331, 544-5, 549,
557
socialism and, 668-9
social security and, 524
theory of, 325 ff.
International Trade Organization,
581-2
Interstate trade barriers, 430-1
Interstate Commerce Commission,
551 n
Investment
-savings relationship, 284, 295,
392-3, 400, 660
stabilizing international, 335-6, 67880
Jackson, Andrew, 309
Jouvenel, Bertrand de, 153
Jevons, W. S., 382
Kaplan, A. D. H., 50
Kelven, Harry, 606 n
Keynes, J. M., 364, 381, 388-9, 394,
607
"King Cotton," 451
E. C. Knight case, 424 n
Knowledge, 67, 243, 247, 426, 686
Kuczynski, R. R., 232
Labor
demand for, 178
defined, 12
diminishing returns and, 100
division of, 35-7
mobility, 183, 233-4, 243
share of in national income, 184,
466-7
supply of, 176-7
Labor Management Relations Act, 465
Laissez-faire, 30, 457
Land
characteristics of, 140-1
defined, 12, 140

740
Land (Cont.)
intramarginal, 142
marginal, 142, 145-6
no-rent, 145-6
private property in, 150, 156-9
value, 147-8
versus capital, 140-1
Law of diminishing returns, 99 ff.; see
also Law of non-proportional
outputs; Law of variable proportions
Law of non-proportional outputs, 99 n
Law of variable proportions, 99 n
Legal tender, 303, 363
Lend-Lease, 553, 588
Lerner, Abba P., 296
Level of living
defined, 176
geographical differences in, 226-7
Liability
limited, 53, 58
unlimited, 51
Liberalism, 543
License, 427
Lilienthal, David E., 221, 424
Liquidity preference, 391
Loanable funds
demand for, 167-9
determinants of, 169-70
market for, 163-4
supply of, 164-5
determinants of, 166-7
Losses; see Profits
defined, 115
functions of, 25, 26

INDEX
Marx, Karl, 383, 388, 650, 652
Mercantilism, 24, 252, 543
Miller-Tydings Act, 430
Minimum wage law
economics of
a partial, 460-1
a universal, 443 ff.
Fair Labor Standards Act, 443
regional aspects of, 447 ff.
Mises, Ludwig von, 606, 654-5
Mitchell, Wesley C , 40 n, 47 n
Mobility, 67, 183, 243, 247, 686
Modley, Rudolph, 458 n
Money; see also Banking; Currency
bank deposits as, ch. 22
bimetallism, 254-6, 303-4
certificate, 302
commodity, 302
communism and, 645 ff.
credit, 302
defined, 13, 254
and equation of exchange, 258-9,
283, 379
fiat, 282

functions of, 253-4
gold, 254
gold standard, 256
legal tender, 256
mercantilism and, 252
pocketbook, 279, 282
price level and, ch. 21
quantity theory of, 379
silver, 254
socialism and, 645 ff.
specialization and, 37, 253
value of, 258 ff.
Malthus, Thomas, 235
velocity of circulation of, 286
Malthusianism, 235
Monetary policy; see also Banking,
Mature economy, 397
Business cycle, Fiscal policy
Management, 12
banking under Models 3 and 4, 28898, 353, 382, 646
bonuses and salaries, 59-60
business cycle and, 401, 405
Market
open market operations, 290-1, 318,
deepening of, 38
320
defined, 37-8, 70 ff., 216
rediscount rate, 289, 316-7
labor market area, 438
United States, 315 ff.
less-than-purely competitive, 69 ff.
Monopoly
for loanable funds, 167-9
anti-trust and, 422 ff.
purely competitive, 68, 189, 218
widening of, 38
cartels, 69, 206
and collusion compared, 207
Marshall, Alfred, 388

741

INDEX
Monopoly (Cont.)
and competition compared, 217-8
defined, 69
elasticity of demand and, 190-1
government and, 428
and inequality, 135
labor-management, 211-2, 468 ff.
natural, 428
output and price under, 193-4
patents and, 223, 427
private tactics listed, 425 n
profits, 194
public policy, 428-9
sources of, 426 ff.
utilities, public, 428-9
Monopsony, 69, 198, 211
Morley, Felix, 577 n
Most-favored-nation treatment, 551
Moulton, Harold G., 283 n, 372 n,
381 n
Multiple-purpose enterprises, economics of, 245 ff., 429, 686
Multiplier, 376, 390
Mund, Vernon, 425 n

Oligopoly, 69, 195
Oligopsony, 70, 198, 211, 471 ff.
Open shop, 463
Opie, Redvers, 588 n
Opportunity cost, 95-6, 328-30
Ormes, F. R., 275
Other-worldliness, 41
Output decisions
under competitive conditions, 121-2
under non-competitive conditions,
192
Parity

farm income, 477-8
foreign exchange, 332
prices, 492-3
purchasing power, 351-2
Partnership, 51-2
Patent, 223, 427
Perloff, Harry S., 620 n
Personal income, 18, Appendix A
Planning, 543, 554, ch. 45
and capitalism, 242 ff., 646-7
and International Monetary Fund,
566-7
National Industrial Conference Board,
as middle way, Ch. 45
615
and socialism, see Socialism
National and International Measures
and war, 668-9
for Full Employment, ch. 45
Plant
National Banking Act, 309 ff.
defined, 49
National income; see also Appendix A
optimum size, 112, 190
accounts, 14
returns to scale of, 112-4
Keynesian analysis and, 397
Point 4 program, 590-1
limitations of, 20, 21, 398
Population
uses of, 15, 398
-capital ratio, 230
concepts of, 15, 18
growth, 615, 623
growth of, 615-6, 623-4
differentials, farm versus nonNational Labor Relations Act, 465
farm, 451
Needs, as distribution formula, 647 ff.
differentials, geographical, 231,
Net fertility rate, 231-2
451
Net national product, 18, Appendix A
Malthus and, 235
Net reproduction rate, 231-2, 451
-natural resource ratio, 229-30
Non-proportional outputs, 101-2
Port of New York Authority, 429
Norris-LaGuardia Act, 465
Power
concentration, 685-6
Obsolescence, 98-9
industry-wide bargaining and, 468-9
Odum, Howard W., 447
police, 158-9, 687
Old age assistance, 527
Pressure groups, 426, 687
Old age and survivors' insurance, Price
527 ff.
control, 118, 151 ff., 675

742
Price (Cont.)
index, 258 ff.
leadership, 207
level
banking and, Chs. 22, 23
and business cycle, 281
and gold standard, 341 ff., 348,
567
stabilization, 263, 266, 281, 316,
676-7
mechanism, 225, 234
mint-, 303, 319
reservation, 119-20
supports, farm, 494 ff., 675
system, 5
Private enterprise system, Ch. 3; see
also Capitalism
defined, 24
evolution of, 24-5
and freedom, 685-6
operation of, 25 ff., 646-7
and power, 685-6
Product
average, 100
differentiation, 195, 219
marginal, 100
standardized, 195
Profits, Ch. 12
accounting, 115-6
business, 115-6
corporate, 53-4
defined, 115
economic, 115-6
functions of, 25, 26, 139
in long-run equilibrium, 125, 138
and innovation, 138-9, 223
and losses, 115-6
maximizing, 120-1
and progress, 139
as residual share, 138, 175
as transitional income, 138
and wages, 436-7
Progress
belief in, 45-6
capitalism and, 234
economic, 28
environment and, 233-4
other-worldliness and, 41
profits and, 139
socialism and, 664-5

INDEX
Progress (Cont.)
standards of living and, 176-7
technological, 219, 233, 552-3
Property, private, 26-7, 134, 618, 648,
686
Proprietorship, individual, 50-1
Public Contracts Act; see WalshHealey Act
Purchasing power parity, 351-2
Public debt; see also Business cycle;
Fiscal policy
growth of, 621-2, 626-7
repudiation of, 622
Public enterprise, 572-3, 637; see also
Multiple-purpose enterprises
Public expenditures; see Business
cycle; Fiscal policy
federal, 614-6, 623-5
and inflation, 623
inter-governmental, 627
local, 616-7, 623-5
state, 616-7, 623-5
and war, 615
Public revenues, 599, 600, 616, 61920, 631 ff.
Public utilities, 428-9
"Pursuit of happiness," 421
Reciprocal Trade Agreement Program, 551, 557, 583
Reconstruction Finance Corporation,
526
Region, 447, 448
Regionalism
adjustments and, 448 ff.
assumptions underlying, 452
defined, 447
economic analysis and, 447 ff.
Regulation W, 321
Regulation X, 321
Reilly, G. D., 458 n
Rent, Chs. 12, 13
of ability, 181
capitalization of, 147-8
control, 151-4
as cost, 439-40
defined, 140
ethics of, 146-50
fertility, 144-5
functions of, Ch. 13

INDEX
Rent (Cont.)
as marginal product, 146
quasi-, 140-1
Single-tax, The, 146
site, 142-4
under socialism, 657-8
as "unearned" income, 150
Reparations, 548
Resources
basic, 12
geographical distribution of, 227-8
human, 4
land, 12, 140
natural, 4
quality of, 28
quantity of, 28
water, 229
Responsibility, principle of, 244 ff.,
457 n, 483, 499-500
Revenue
average revenue, 192 ff.
government; see Public revenues
marginal, 87-8, 92, 191 ff.
total, 87-8
Ricardo, David, 99 n
Riesel, Victor, 466
Rieve, Emil, 227 n
Rights, vested, 156-9
Robinson-Patman Act, 423
Rochdale Pioneers, 54
Rockefeller Foundation, 7
Roepke, W., 153, 667 n, 681-2
Rural Electric Administration, 490-1
Ruskin, John, 46
Russell, Bertrand, 509 n
Saving; see also Business cycle; Fiscal policy; Interest; Planning
defined, 20
forced, 233, 660
income and, 167
-investment relationship, 284, 295,
liquidity preference and, 166
over-, 384
role of, 29, 165
time preference and, 165-6
under-, 411
Say, J. B., 251-3
Say's Law, 251, 369

743
Scarce currency concept, 561 ff.
Schumpeter, J. A., 221-3, 384-5, 424,
638, 648
Scientific method, 7, 643
Security; see Social security
adjustment and, 511-2
concept analyzed, 509, 511
through guaranteed income, 522-3
through insurance, 513, 514
lack of, causes, 510
productivity and, 511
responsibility for, 512
specialization and, 510-1
Self-interest, 28, 33, 646-7
Sherman Act; see Anti-trust
Shotwell, J. T., 578 n
Silver
"Crime of 1873," 305
issue, the, 305-6, 615 n
Simons, H. C , 428, 469
Single-tax, The; see Tax
Sixteenth Amendment, 623
Slaughterhouse Cases, 421 n
Slichter, S. H., 220, 468
Small business, taxation and, 637
Smith, Adam, 24, 25, 29, 33, 37, 42,
481, 598, 600 ff.
Social philosophy, 515
Social security; see also Security
Act of 1935, 527 ff.
and amendments, 534 ff.
defined, 509-10
federalism and, 523-4
international complications and, 524
Socialism, Ch. 44
business cycle and, 665-7
distribution formula, 648, 654
efficiency of, 658
and incentives, 648
and innovation, 660-1, 663
interest under, 662 ff.
and international trade, 668-9
investment under, 659-60, 661-2,
666
Marxian, 650 ff.
resource allocation under, 655 ff.
and war, 668-9
Soil
erosion, 498-9
leaching, 499

744
Soil (Cont.)
profile, 498
Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act, 493
Soil Conservation Service, 500-1
Sorokin, Pitirim, 668
Spahr, Walter, 406 n
Specialization, Ch. 4
Spending; see also Business cycle;
Fiscal policy; Planning; Appendix A
compensatory, 401
consumer
and business cycle, 400
general equilibrium in, 82-3
consumption, 19, 400
government; see Public expenditures
investment, 19, 400
sources of, 19
total, components of, 19, Appendix
A
Standard of living, 176, 235
State, Ch. 20
and firm compared, 49, 240
functions of, 239, 244 ff., 598, 686
Stevenson, Adlai E., 688
Stewart, W. W., 360 n
Stigler, G. J., 153, 220
Stine, C. M. A., 552-3
Stock, corporation, 58
Stolper, Gustav, 524 n
Supply, Chs. 9, 10
changes in, 124-6
curve, 124-6
graphic presentation of, 124
individual, 94
of labor services, 176
market, 94
of resources, 101
schedule, 94-5
Taft, Robert A., 424
Tariffs
and collusion, 428
and creditor countries, 545-6, 586
and customs procedures, 584-5
and farm income, 480-1
and infant industry concept, 545
level of, 583-4

INDEX
Tariffs (Cont.)
and national interest, 586
revenue, 544 n
stable, 587-8
uncertainty of, 585
Taussig, F. W., 270
Tax
capital gains, 634-5
corporation, 53, 54, 634
estate, 606, 635
general property, the, 618-9
income, 632
indirect, business, 18
inheritance, 635, 688-9
land value increment, 157-8
sales, 676
sharing, 628
Single, 146, 156-8
Taxation
ability to pay principle of, 241, 522,
605-6
benefit principle of, 600
business cycle and; see Business
cycle
canons of, 600-1
double, 54, 634, 636
and incentives, 403, 412, 605-6
and income redistribution, 399,
638, 673
and inequality, 399, 688
progressive, 599, 636, 673
proportional, 599, 600
regressive, 599, 622
of "unearned" increment, 158
Tennessee Valley Authority, 429
Time preference, 165-6
Trade
free, 206
international; see International
trade
interregional, 448 ff.
-mark, 196
union; see Union
Transfer payments, 18, Appendix A
Turner, F. J., 447
Uncertainty, 163, 419
Underdeveloped countries
fair wages in, 578-9
International Bank and, 570

745

INDEX
Underdeveloped countries (Cont.)
International Labor Office and, 57681
prerequisites for industrialization
of, 230, 236, 573-4, 689
"Unearned" increment, taxation of,
158
Unions (Trade Unions); see also Collective bargaining
American Federation of Labor, 464,
Clayton Act and, 465
Congress of Industrial Organizations, 464, 466
defined, 209
dues, 463
growth of, 465-6
Labor Management Relations Act,
465
legal evolution of, 464 ff.
National Labor Relations Act, 465
Norris-LaGuardia Act, 465
power of, 468-9
and private enterprise, 235
Sherman (Anti-Trust) Act, 464-5
types of
closed shop, 211 n, 463, 465
closed union, 463
craft, 464
industrial, 464
open shop, 463
open union, 463
union shop, 463
and wages, 466-7
United Automobile Workers, CIO, 46
United Nations
full employment commitment of,
672
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, 553
United States Steel Corporation, 424
Unemployment; see also Business
cycle
cyclical, 372
frictional, 369-70
insurance, 527, 528 ff.
involuntary, 405
seasonal, 369-70
voluntary, 369, 405

Utility

•

diminishing marginal, 79
applications, 81-2, 605-6
taxation and, 605-6
marginal, 79
Value judgments, 6-8, 452, 643, 645,
685
Van Sickle, J. V., 239, 458 n, 461 n,
468 n, 482 n, 512 n, 620 n,
667 n
Veblen, Thorstein, 660
Velocity of circulation of money, 286
Vested rights, 156-9
Viner, Jacob, 682
Wage standards, 435 ff.
Wages, Chs. 15, 30, 31
defined, 175
determination of
under pure competition, 176-7,
435
under collective bargaining, 209under monopsony, 211-2, 471 ff.
under ologopsony, 211, 471 ff.
differentials in, 178 ff.
cost-of-living, 441-2
equalizing, 179
functions of, 183
geographical, 182 ff., 438-40
inter-community, 438-9
international, 577
interregional, 453-4
intra-community, 437
occupational, 179
portal-to-portal, 440-1
real, 180, 441
rent factor in, 438-9
rent of ability and, 181
size of community, 438 ff.
explicit, 51
"fair," see Wage standards
of federal employees, 456 ff.
and inflation, 354, 355-6, 677
minimum, see Minimum wage law
as share of national income, 184,
466-7
and supply of labor services, 176
unions and, 466-7

746
Wagner Act, see National Labor Relations Act
Walsh-Healey Act, 458-9
Wants, 3, 11
Welfare principle, 516, 522
Wheel of Wealth, 14, 16, 17, 645-6

INDEX
Wheeler-Lea Act, 422
Whyte, William F., 468 n
Wolaver, E. S., 431 n
World War II, heritage of, 552 ff.
Wright, D. M., 666
Wright, Quincy, 668

